
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
  
 
 
2010 EXAMINERS’ REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without prejudice, this report is delivered for information purposes only, and may not be 
relied upon by individual candidates with reference to their particular examination papers. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Chairman of Examiners Panel Introduction 
This report highlights the key observations of the Examiners so as to provide information 
and help for those who sat the 2010 Exam and for future candidates. 
Each section has been written by the Chair of the respective  panel of Examiners, and this 
introduction provides an overview of more general issues. 
General Comments 
It is with real pleasure that the examiners  were able to record a much high er number of 
passes in both the Theory and Practical parts of the 2010 exam.  It was g ood to see much 
better papers in this element of the exam . The successful candidates and their mentors and 
teachers are to be congratulated.  However, the Practical report does highlight potential 
improvements. 
The comments that follow should be taken in the context of these improved results. 
Theory Paper 1 results were poor for the second year running. The Chief Examiner‟s review 
confirmed the panel Chair‟s observations that there was not enough  detailed knowledge and 
understanding of viticulture an d vinification . In  some cases, the average mark for  a 
candidate was rescued by good marks on papers 2,  3 an d 4. This cannot be relied upon 
always to happen. Future candidates and their mentors nee d to  read carefully the panel 
Chair‟s report and to allocate  enough study time to learning about and understand ing the 
issues covered in this part of the syllabus. 
Generally, Theory answers that failed showed evidence of insufficient planning and had poor 
introductions. Most questions in the MW exam require an essa y answer , and practice is 
needed to make sure that facts are clearly written  with arguments coherently made . A 
concise introduction, well argued body of the answer and a clear summary are always 
important. 
In Theory Paper 3, there were too many factual err ors, some of which are commented on in 
the report. It might sound obvious but incorrect facts do not help candidates‟ chances!  
Guidelines on spelling are again indicated in the report, which will help future candidates. 
The Dissertation 
We do not comment in detail on the 2010 Dissertations in this report, as candidates receive 
individual feedback. However, as successful candidates move on to the Dissertation, the 
Examiners urge them to remember that passing the Dissertation is not a foregone 
conclusion. Candidates should make full use of help from their mentors and  of the  
information provided by the Institute. Those whose dissertations have been referred must be 
ready to act on comments from the Examiners. 
Robin Kinahan MW 
Chairman of the Examination Board 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Guidelines to students on examiners’ approaches to handwriting, spelling and 
grammar 
Handwriting. If Examiners are unable to read scripts because they are illegible, then they 
cannot award a mark .  Such scripts will fail. Candidates should also unde rstand that poor 
handwriting makes it hard to follow the flow of an answer, with the danger that relevant 
detail may not be appreciated by Examiners.  
Spelling and grammar . Examiners  take a lenient attitude to a small number of minor 
spelling and grammatic al errors. It is also recognised and fully accepted that some 
candidates come from English -speaking countries that use different grammar or spelling 
conventions from the UK. However, Examiners do expect candidates to spell wine names 
and terms correctly, and persistent incorrect spelling thereof will be reflected in the award of 
marks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Theory Paper 1, Production of Wine Part 1  
Paper One is, essentially, a technical paper which requires a demonstration of understanding 
of the fund amentals of viticulture and vinification. The questions are usually broad, with 
candidates being required to link vineyard practices to cellar outcomes, thereby requiring 
sifting of information to ensure that only truly relevant points and examples are inc luded. 
There is neither space nor time for unnecessary padding. The Examiners understand the 
broadness of the questions in this paper, and reward candidates who hone their answers 
down to the relevant points , resisting the temptation to wander off the poin t. It is evident in 
these broad questions where a candidate has spent time in vineyards and cellars , as their 
answers apply to their personal e xperiences and demonstrate understanding of the 
principles under discussion without being sidetracked. 
Once again the issue of examples has been raised by the Examiners.  Whilst examples must 
be included to illustrate a point or statement, they must be relevant to the statement they are 
being used to illustrate ; otherwise they are of much less value. This year there were several 
instances of generic, sweeping statements such as: „In Bordeaux, producers use reverse 
osmosis machines‟ without saying who, why, and for what purpose. Rather than displaying 
knowledge, this suggests to the Examiner that the candidate does not  really understand the 
principles under discussion.  
 
1. How might a winemaker influence the alcohol levels in unfortified wine from 
the vineyard to the cellar and why might this be desirable? 
This was a broad question that addresses the basic principles  of viticulture and vinification. 
It should be noted that there are two parts to the question – how and why.  
Examiners were looking for an understanding that potential alcohol can be manipulated 
through the growing season and right through to the end of f ermentation (and beyond), and 
they were looking for the range of techniques which may be used to alter potential alcohol 
levels throughout the process, from pruning/training, vineyard practices (green harvesting, 
etc.), yields, timing of harvest, cellar pr actices such as chaptalisation/addition of 
must/stopping ferments/RO/spinning cone (and all their attendant restrictions). For each 
method of influencing alcohol, Examiners expected to see noted the expected outcome (e .g. 
green harvesting for yield reducti on and increased concentration). Generally the cellar part 
of the question was answered more completely than the vineyard part, with many opting to 
start their answers on the vineyard part at harvest time, whereas practices in the earlier 
season also have an important influence on alcohol levels. 
 
2. What are the effects of different extraction methods used when vinifying a) 
Pinot Noir and b) Cabernet Sauvignon grapes? 
The question turned out to have the lowest overall grade of any of the questions on Pa per 
One, with one Examiner commenting that they were shocked that there appears so little 
understanding of how red wine is made. There were two potential ways of approaching this 
question: either by tackling each grape variety separately or as a comparison between similar 
techniques on each grape variety and their outcomes. The latter approach ran the risk of 
omitting a technique which applied just to one variety. What was clear was that many of the 
answers did not have a full understanding of the technique s they were discussing (e .g. cold 
soak being done in water). As a minimum, Examiners were looking for: options on 
===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
crushing/destemming, macerations pre and post fermentation, temperatures of maceration, 
and cap management with all the attendant explanations  for each technique and its desired 
outcome. 
 
3. What is the potential of THREE of the following grape varieties for making 
high quality table wine: 
 
 Carignan 
 Petit Verdot 
 Roussanne 
 Petit Manseng 
 Touriga Nacional 
 
This question was best answered by writin g a section on each grape discussed. The question 
required three grapes to be considered, each carr ied equal marks so deserved equal 
attention.  Although quite widely answered, it was not one of the higher scoring questions 
overall. 
Answers needed to asses s whether the variety was capable of high  quality, and could 
conclude either way – providing that they substantiated th is conclusion by their arguments. 
In the course of the argument Examiners expected to see a brief description of the grape 
(thick/thin skinned, high/low acid, yields, temperature/disease resistance etc) and where it 
is currently found, i.e. real examples, and what its natural restrictions were (i.e. if too 
hot/too high yielding/too much chalk in soil etc). In order to prove the potential fo r high 
quality wine, candidates needed to indicate areas where the grape had particular success 
with particular types of handling. 
 
4. How would you manage an established vineyard in a ‘hot climate’? 
The key words in this question were the word „establi shed‟ and „hot climate‟ . Answers were 
expected to show an understanding that the vineyard was already planted in a hot climate. 
The question was essentially asking students to examine how the heat may be mitigated (or 
used to benefit) and the fruit protect ed to reach full maturity . The best answers examined 
both a high production hot zone and a low production/high quality hot zone. Answers 
needed to define what was meant by a hot climate, indicating that some may be very hot by 
day but cool by night, others are hot all day and night, some are hot and humid and some hot 
and dry. Detailed figures for such things as temperatures and humidity were important. The 
essential points that needed to be covered included water availability, canopy management 
mid-season (as trellising may be assumed to be in place), pest/disease management, soil 
management, timings of procedures, and the effect of temperature on grape ripening and 
maturity.  
 
 
 
===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
5. How can vine nutrition be improved through soil management? 
A fundamental question about the relationship between the vine and the soil, this question 
was the most successfully answered and one of the most popular on the paper. 
Encompassing both the impact of physical cultivation techniques (ploughing, cover crops 
etc.) on vi ne nutrition as well as additions or adjustments to the soil makeup, this required 
firm knowledge with an understanding of deficiencies  and their corrections as well as an 
indication of how the soil and the vine‟s nutrition would be assessed (soil testing,  petiole 
testing). It also required an understanding of hydrology and how nutrients are accessed by 
the plants. 
 
6.  Examine the importance of temperature at different stages of vinification, 
with examples from both red and white winemaking. 
A very popular  question, which was generally answered quite well. Essentially it required  
students to evaluate the effects of different temperatures during the winemaking process. It 
is a big question, and the best and most coherent answers were those which approached it in 
two parts: red and white wines. 
The vinification period includes up to the end of malo -lactic conversion and the subsequent 
run into barrel where relevant: not covering MLF was , therefore, considered an omission. 
Some asserted that it was not part of this paper and therefore was not going to be included in 
their essay (i.e. they had considered it), but as Paper 1 is considered to run through from 
vineyard up until the beginning of maturation MLF should always be considered in a 
question like this. Equ ally, students needed to know where to stop as some considered 
temperature influence right up to bottling, which is not strictly within the scope of the 
question. Whilst this clearly did not lose them marks, it did mean that valuable time was 
spent on a pa rt of an answer which was not going to gain extra points. Basic points to be 
considered were: temperature at every point of the winemaking process, from harvest, to pre 
and post fermentation holds, and the reason for the choices behind these processes and their 
outcomes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Theory Paper 2  - The Production of Wine Part 2 
 
General 
This year‟s Theory Paper 2 provided candidates with an opportunity to demonstrate their 
technical knowledge and understanding of many of the subjects forming the core of  the 
syllabus. The questions required varying approaches if they were to be answered 
successfully. 
This is a technical paper, requiring precision and accuracy. A colloquial written style is 
therefore not appropriate, nor well suited to expressing the candi date‟s knowledge. All of the 
Paper 2 Examiners remarked on the prevalence of the inaccurate use of technical terms. It is 
essential to ensure that responses remain at all times focused on answering the question 
itself, and not using the question as a prompt for a more freelance exploration of a particular 
subject. Those candidates employing a well structured essay form tended to be better 
equipped to communicate to the Examiners. 
 
1. How might the most common faults in finished wine be avoided and 
detected? 
This question required no complex knowledge or chemical formulae, although scripts with 
more facts and technical detail did garner higher marks.  Structurally it was not complex, 
allowing a list type response as long as the two key parts of th e question – avoidance and 
detection – were covered.  Whilst there were some outstanding answers, which were 
compelling and articulate with excellent use of examples, it was disappointing that many 
failed to cover the key points.  Basic syllabus material must not be ignored if candidates wish 
to pass. 
The best scripts did not just focus on the negative side of what is considered to be a fault, but 
also mentioned that a little bit of brettanomyces and volatile acidity, for example, can add to 
the complexity of the wine.  Good answers also commented that some styles of wine are 
made in a deliberately oxidative manner (e.g. gran reserva Rioja, tawny port, or oloroso 
sherry), and that sparkling wines are more protected against oxidation. There was some very 
good technical detail which was to be commended.  Sadly, a number of answers failed to 
mention how the faults can be detected, despite an excellent discourse on their avoidance.  
This failure to answer both parts of the question meant fewer marks could be awarded. 
Candidates should refrain from referring to “corky” taint.  Corks were often simply dismissed 
as a closure with LSC, Vino -lok etc . being heralded as the only viable alternative and no 
mention made of the changes and developments in the cork closure in dustry.  Moreover, 
having HACCPs is not the cure  all that many scripts seemed to suggest and this was not the 
place to hold a discourse on QC, QA, BRC etc. Monitoring and observation by themselves do 
not prevent faults. 
 
2. What issues should be considered when replacing an existing bottling line? 
This question required a very clear knowledge and understanding of the bottling line and the 
issues surrounding it. It was attempted by relatively few candidates and , with one or two 
notable exceptions, the answers were not strong, giving only superficial detail. 
===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
The question concerned the replacement of an existing bottling line, while some responses 
addressed the installation of a new one. Equally , many used this as an opportunity to give a 
descriptive of the bottling process, rather than getting to grips with the question set. 
Many candidates covered HACCP in detail, although all that was required was to mention to 
check if it was sufficient to cover the new line. The responses showed that many candidates 
had no t spent time in a bottling facility, and revealed a lack of hard information such as 
machinery/plant specifications, financial costings, time lines for installation, line speeds etc. 
Few candidates covered why the bottling line was being replaced. 
 
3. Write concise notes on three of the following: 
a. TCA (2,4,6-trichloranisole) 
b. American oak 
c. Fining agents 
d. Volatile acidity 
This question was generally well answered, and had the highest average mark for Paper 2. It 
required technical explanations, concisely expressed. 
  Some points to be noted: 
a) Must know threshold for TCA is ppt NOT ppm 
b) Must understand how TCA is formed and the names of the fungi involved. 
c) Must know legal limits for VA 
d) Commercial names for fining agents should not be used since they do not always 
translate across the world 
e) Proteins do not bind proteins 
 
4. Why and how should wine be stabilised before bottling? 
This was the least well answered question for Paper 2, on a subject that should have been 
better understood. While many answers  demonstrated a good working knowledge of the 
basic principles, it was the level of depth and detail required at this level which let far too 
many down. 
There was some confusion between clarifying a wine versus stabilising a wine prior to 
bottling. Many answers used/quoted addition rates that were not correct or were used in the 
wrong context. 
To stabilise a wine is to remove unstable proteins and tartrates (calcium and potassium).  
This is all that was needed but it did need to be covered in detail.  Few answers demonstrated 
an understanding of this.  Too many focused on filtration, MLF, and fining. Sterile filtration 
is performed at bottling so was outside the range of the question.  Answers could have 
covered colour stability as well but what we wanted wa s WHY and HOW wines are protein 
and tartrate stabilised BEFORE bottling.  
 
5. What impact does temperature have on the storage and maturation of wine? 
This question was attempted by relatively few candidates, possibly suggesting a lack of 
understanding of a basic part of the syllabus. 
===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
The few good answers used real world examples to support their reasoning , while poor ones 
were shallow, lacked precision and relied on generalisations. Clear definitions of storage 
versus maturation were required for a well -structured answer and some understanding of 
the effect of temperature on the rate of chemical and enzymatic reactions was vital. The 
implications behind use of different vessels including inert tanks, oak and glass bottles were 
important too, but often not clearly covered. Very few mentioned that oxygen is more soluble 
at low temperatures and thus failed to consider the implications of low temperature 
handling. Sloppy use of the word “sulphur” when the  writer means sulphur dioxide is to be 
discouraged; it may be in widespread usage in the wine business but it is inaccurate in 
chemical terms. 
 
6. What are the main factors, following the first alcoholic fermentation,  that 
affect the quality and style of sparkling wine?  
This question prompted a small number of very strong responses, but a greater number 
which were in some way lacking. Answers needed to cover both general factors that apply to 
all types of sparkling wine (blending, MLF, tirage, yeast, time on lees, dosage and 
temperature) as well as factors applicable to the particular method of making sparkling wine.  
Too many candidates lost marks by only describing what happens rather than making their 
answers relevant to the question. Several made sweeping claims about the high quali ty of 
Champagne and appear not to be aware of the existence of entry level, lower quality 
Champagnes.  Very few considered the possibility of lees ageing and stirring in tank.  
Transfer method was frequently dismissed as lower quality without any real expl anation, or 
recognition that this is used in Champagne for large and small format bottles without any 
notable impact on quality.  Different gas pressures and how these are achieved, plus their 
effect on style and quality were rarely covered and very few ca ndidates showed awareness of 
the possible role of yeast autolysis products in foam stability and thus bubble quality. 
Examples cited were largely confined to Champagne, Prosecco, Cava and Asti.  
===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Theory Paper 3 – The Business of Wine 
General 
Overall, there were a good number of sound answers, which showed understanding of the 
commercial and financial issues required. The emphasis of this paper is the Business of 
Wine, and candidates must always consider financial aspects and cost implications in their 
answers. A list of facts shows knowledge but not necessarily understanding of the subject, 
which is what the Examiners are looking for. 
The questions required candidates to give clear definitions within their introductions in 
order to define the scope of the an swer and to avoid unstructured digressions from  the 
subject. Figures quoted must be accurate: the Examiners do check, and have often shared the 
relevant figures with each other in advance. One answer, for example, quoted the population 
of China as 7.9M. 
Examples quoted must be relevant, detailed, specific and accurate, not simplistic nor 
anecdotal and should be attributed if appropriate.  There continue to be many answers that 
show poor planning, wandering off the topic, or being too focused on on e country (usually  
the UK or USA). 
 
1. Does the short term get in the way of the long term? Answer from the point of 
view of a wine brand owner. 
This question demanded a clear understanding that the answer would vary by price and 
brand volume. It also requ ired a discussion of the major trade -offs between short -term and 
long-term issues, especially as to how they relate to financial implications. Too many 
answers did not distinguish between large and small brands, and were too USA or UK centric 
without any g lobal reference. Several answers turned into a n attack upon  poor brand 
management, which was not acceptable. 
The most common structure was using the 4 Ps, which generally worked well, often 
supported by a SWOT analysis. Clear planning lifted the good answers. In each area, the long 
and short term should have been contrasted, with the advantages and disadvantages of each. 
Weaker answered showed a lack of examples to illustrate points  and lack of structured 
content. 
 
2. As a wine brand owner, what can you do to reduce the carbon footprint of 
your brand? 
This was the more popular of the two questions in this section, and many candidates appear 
to have considered it as deceptively easy to structure: vineyard, winery, bulk and packaging. 
However, this made the in troduction and conclusion very important, especially the issue of 
why a brand should do it. Too often a „one size fits all‟ answer was given with no discussion of 
the implications and trade-offs of such actions. Essays that went from ploughing with horses 
to shipments in flexitanks via organic and biodynamic viticulture without discussing the 
practicalities did not demonstrate mastery of the question. 
There was little discussion of accreditation and off -setting was often poorly understood. 
There were some p oor examples with a number of glaring inaccuracies. One answer 
indicated that Constellation‟s new bottling plant in Bristol has a capacity of 2M cases per 
year, whereas it is actually 26M cases per year. 
===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
The better answers displayed a clea r sense of priorities, examining which areas had the 
potential for the greatest impact and areas of direct v ersus indirect influence. Answers were 
stronger on packaging and distribution and weaker on winemaking and viticulture options. 
 
3. What are the ris k and reward factors that need to be considered when 
evaluating whether buying fine wine is an appropriate part of an investment 
portfolio? 
This question was generally well answered with some clear definitions and discussions of 
what constitutes fine wine,  how that may have changed, and including discussion of a wide 
range of possible risks and rewards. The best answers used multiple examples and made 
comparisons with other types of investment.  
Less successful answers set out how to invest in fine wine, ra ther than discussing the risks 
and rewards. Several used a SWOT analysis structure which tended to lead them off the 
subject in this question. Critical thinking as opposed to rote use of memorized information 
and facts was important to success. Many quoted  the recent articles regarding Liv -ex: again 
these were checked by the Examiners and needed to be accurate but also put into context 
and understood, not merely quoted. Those who showed understanding of practical realities 
scored highest. 
 
4. Evaluate the m ost effective ways in which wine producers can communicate 
with consumers? 
This was a very popular question but not generally well answered. There were many long, 
unstructured essays, written  in a n informal style , that were little more than lists with no 
critical analysis. Too many were too chatty  with little perspective and many were narrow in 
outlook with no global view or examples. 
The answer had to demonstrate the understanding that effective communication will vary 
significantly by price, size and geographical location of the producer, and that there are a 
wide range of communication vehicles. Examples were needed throughout with some notion 
being given of the impact and costs of each. Many concentrated on the new social media 
areas, dismissing the more traditional areas without considering the target market and the 
financial side. The discussion needed to include why each way is effective and to what extent. 
 
5. Who makes the most profit on a bottle of wine in today’s market? How is this 
changing? 
This was the least popular question, yet is fundamental to an understanding of the wine 
trade. There were few borderline answers; most were a clear fail or a good pass. 
A successful answer required a clear definition of „profit‟ as opposed to margin and be tter 
answers discussed return on assets or investment as well as simple return on sales. A 
common failing of unsuccessful answers was wandering between profitability and margin 
definitions in the course of the essay and being inconsistent. 
There was no sin gle correct answer but what was required was an understanding of how the 
answer might vary by price, geography and position in the supply chain.   A point of view was 
required. The easiest structure was to follow the supply chain from grower to retailer. Th e 
second part of the question was also missed in the less successful answers.  
===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
There were many instances of incorrect margins quoted, at retailer and agent level, and also 
errors in tax. Statistics must be accurate. Several answers did not consider growers at all. 
 
6. How can France regain its market share of the global wine market? 
This question required a good knowledge of the French wine industry and about specific 
markets and brand building. It was essential to separate premium and mass market and to 
focus on mature and immature markets , including domestic. A planned structure was 
needed and a SWOT analysis worked best with some discussion of the 4 Ps. Some answers 
focused too much on the premium end, which is not where the main problem lies. 
However, there were many answers which were little more than a ttacks on perceived French 
attitudes and which offered no other solution than varietal labelling. A similar question came 
up in 2006, and the market has changed significantly since then. Some answers did not seem 
to have moved with the market and showed little understanding of the implications of new 
legislation. 
Inaccurate facts and brand names made it difficult for candidates to score high marks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 14 =====
14 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Theory Paper 4 – Contemporary Issues 
General 
Paper 4 presents an opportunity for candidates to show their knowledge of contemporary 
issues in the international wine trade.  It gives candidates the chance to develop strong 
arguments, which must be supported by relevant facts and literature. D iscussion is essential 
to demonstrate that the candidate has a broad vision, accommodating more than one point 
of view on any issue.  This paper requires answers that are illustrated with solid evidence 
from around the world : simply writing from the perspe ctive of one country will rarely allow 
the candidate to achieve enough marks to pass.  Candidates are therefore encouraged to read 
extensively and to widen their knowledge of international wine trade issues in preparation 
for this paper. 
The questions in P aper 4 are deliberately wide ranging and so there must be a clear logic to 
the way that arguments are built up and demonstrated in the answers.  In general the 
answers in 2010 were on the same high level as in 2009, with many candidates showing a 
good glob al perspective and supporting their analyses with facts and relevant examples.  
However, poor answers were too often insufficiently analytical and lacking relevant 
examples.  Furthermore, many candidates would have done better if they had spent more 
time on planning their essays.  Whilst there are no precisely right or wrong answers on this 
paper, candidates are reminded that factual errors will result in lower marks.  
 
1. Examine the extent to which ‘wine is a social evil’. 
This was a broad ranging question and the most popular on this year‟s Paper 4.  The question 
needed a definition of the term „social evil‟.  Answers also needed to assess why wine might 
be considered as such, and to address both sides of the argument in order to pass. 
In such a wide -ranging question, where answers need to discuss as many issues as possible, 
planning the answer is essential and time is well spent doing this before starting to write.  
The examiners expected answers to cover health effects, social behaviour issues, commercia l 
issues and government policies as well as cultural issues.  Good answers were wide -ranging, 
supported by relevant examples from around the world and with a sound conclusion.  Poorer 
answers did not appear planned, did not have enough examples, did not co ver enough 
ground, were to o simplistic, were at times difficult to follow and/or were lacking a proper 
conclusion. 
Overall there were a good crop of passes and two outstanding answers. 
 
2. Looking ahead towards 2050, what impact do you think climate ch ange will 
have upon wine production? 
The key terms in this question were „climate change‟ and „wine production‟.  Many answers 
took „climate change‟ to equal „global warming‟, but global warming is only part of climate 
change and answers that took this na rrow approach did not pass.  Candidates must answer 
the question that is set and not what they think they can write about.   Furthermore, many 
candidates seemed to be misled by the term „wine production‟ and answered narrowly only in 
terms of viticulture and vinification. 
===== PAGE 15 =====
15 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
To answer the question properly, answers needed to consider „climate change‟ and „wine 
production‟ in a wider sense and then to make a judgement of what to expect in 40 years 
time. 
Consideration should have been given to the influence of cl imate change on viticulture, 
vinification, where vines are grown, wine styles, wine packaging, consumer trends in 
different parts of the world and international legislation as well as financial issues. Good 
answers needed a wide range of examples from around the world. 
Overall the pass rate on this question was high but because many otherwise good answers 
were too narrow in their approach, many passes were borderline. However there were two 
very good answers. 
 
3. ‘The wine business is reaching a tipping po int’ (Troy Christensen, 
Constellation).  In your view, who will be the winners of the future wine 
industry in the next 10 years and why? 
Again, this was a very broad question where successful answers benefited from good 
planning. Candidates needed to defi ne the term „tipping point‟, explain what defines a 
winner and to answer all parts of the question, specifically both the „who‟ and the „why‟, in an 
international context. 
Of those answers that did define the term „tipping point‟, some took it to mean „the  critical 
point at which the business is no longer profitable‟ whilst others defined it as „the change 
from niche to mass market‟. The examiners accepted both definitions as long as the answers 
were sufficiently analytical, well argued and wide-ranging in their approach. 
However too many answers just listed key points, and did not show enough analysis. They 
answered the „who‟, but not the „why‟. Good answers addressed both and analysed the 
question itself, with good examples from around the world to support  the arguments being 
made. 
 
4. Can Riesling challenge Chardonnay and Sauvignon Blanc for dominance on 
the world stage? 
This was a straightforward question, but again good planning was essential. 
Many answers began by describing the current world market f or Riesling, Chardonnay and 
Sauvignon Blanc, and put it into a historical context.  However , to gain a pass , answers 
needed to express knowledge from throughout the rest of the syllabus : viticulture, 
vinification, taste profiles with and without food, and marketing in terms of  how to change 
consumer choices. Answers should not only have covered fine wines but needed to include 
international examples of entry and mid -price points as well.  The best answers showed a 
good structure, a wide -ranging knowledge, a  good breadth of examples and persuasive 
arguments. 
 
5. Can the classification of first growth (Erste Lage) vineyards do the German 
wine industry any good? 
This should have been an easy option for those who knew the German wine industry well. 
But as with last year‟s question about Fairtrade wines this was a very specific question, which 
===== PAGE 16 =====
16 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
was not attempted by most of the candidates. Only four candidates answered the question, 
with one answer being incomplete as the candidate apparently ran out of time. 
The su ccessful answers briefly explained the German classification system and the term 
Erste Lage, gave reasons for the change and made well -argued comparisons to the 
classification systems in Bordeaux and Burgundy. The question also invited an assessment of 
the quality of the new German classification system, although none of the answers took this 
approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Practical Examination 2010  
 
General  
 
1. Timing 
It is almost impossible for candidates to pass the exam if they leave blank she ets. The best 
candidates all put something down for every section of every answer, however brief. It is 
critical to get on with the answers as soon as possible; do not be delayed by agonizing over 
one or two wines. Many candidates wrote too much when there were not that many marks on 
offer. Try to write enough to secure maximum points, but do not over -elaborate.  
 
2. Reasoning 
Check that your arguments are logical. Good answers do of course contain mistakes but their 
reasoning invariably appears sound. By contrast what are examiners to make of: 
“High acid suggests cool climate. While plush and fruity maintains an elegance that 
suggests old world. Sweet fruit suggests warm/cool climate and high alcohol as well”.  
Two sentences that make sense, followed by an  obscure conclusion. The good points fail to 
attain their deserved marks when they are undermined by a few words dashed off in haste. 
Another answer identified correctly a Malbec (from Cahors), but justified it by saying “not 
firm enough tannins for Cab Sa uv”. Obviously Cabernet Sauvignon does have firm tannins, 
but all good candidates will know that Malbec, particularly in Cahors, is noted for its (very) 
firm tannins.  
One Examiner commented: “Many answers lacked structure and logic. It might help 
candidates to approach the whole exercise of blind tasting in a very systematic manner 
which ensures all elements of the wine have been discussed, every time, and in a logical 
order. For example, talking about tannins at the beginning of your argument when they 
are not the key that unlocks the origin argument makes little sense and comes across as a 
weak argument that lacks authority.” 
 
3. Language 
Try to use language that is both intelligible and apposite. One (good) answer referred to a 
wine as popular with „ Millennials‟. Examiners (trying not to be like antiquated Law Lords) 
did of course check the expression using Google. But whilst enlightened as to the word itself, 
we remain in the dark as to its relevance in the context of the question. 
It is important to use  terminology and names that are relevant to the wine and area of its 
production. Thus, Syrah is preferred to Shiraz to refer to grapes grown in the Rhone valley in 
France. One Examiner commented on the Rhone question: 
“The question about quality within the  context of the region was poorly answered. 
Candidates should firstly use the terminology relevant to the region concerned and 
secondly think carefully about the language they use in order to be specific about the 
quality they conclude. The best answers se rved to illustrate a deep knowledge of the area 
concerned”. 
An otherwise outstanding candidate took the use of abbreviations to an unprecedented level. 
Half of page 1 of each paper was taken up with a full code to explain the system. It was 
===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
perfectly logic al and apposite. However it was of such length and complexity that the 
examiners had to flick back to the unusual code from every subsequent page and the 
candidate felt  obliged to give regular reminders of the acronyms throughout the answers . 
More importantly the process encouraged a „formula‟ approach to answers. So for example 
the term “RN&SP” (restrained nose and savoury palate) proved a useful argument for some 
of the wines shown. It failed, however, when it became the „rote‟ justification for all old world 
wine. It was clearly not appropriate, for instance, in trying to justify a conclusion of Alsace 
Gewurztraminer, which, obviously, does not often have a “RN”. The Examiners‟ advice is to 
use abbreviations sparingly. By all means cut down  verbiage wherever possible. Simply be 
sure to remain clear and easy to understand. 
Can we also ask that if asked for a region or grape variety, the answer should be complete -
e.g. not simply „Gruner‟ or „Pessac‟. If referring to a currency then clearly st ate the origin e.g. 
US$. 
 
4. Get the Knowledge 
Everyone has strong and weak areas of knowledge. Good candidates have clearly built 
around their areas of expertise to enable them to display a sound grasp of every major wine 
producing area and variety. It se ems invidious to quote disastrous mistakes, but it is 
important that we do so for all to see the kind of thing that can let a student down. Anyone 
can make such a „clanger‟, but most can be avoided if the background work is done before the 
exam. 
a) There was an answer, for example, which noted high acidity in one of the Rhone 
quartet and then concluded Châteauneuf du Pape. This may have been a last moment 
guess. But the impression given is that the student feels that high acidity is a typical 
feature of Châtea uneuf.  A very similar impression was given by a note of “ semi-
aromatic, high acidity = Viognier”. More subtle perhaps, but equally unacceptable at 
this level: “ Lacks cool climate definition of Casablanca. More likely consistent with 
Leyda”. 
b) One answer suggested Tempranillo for the pair of Malbecs. They garnered some good 
marks, however, for some sound reasoning. This was then wasted by suggesting that 
the first of the two wines was a Douro red. Although Tinta Roriz and Tempranillo are 
the same grape, Dour o reds are rarely dominated by Tinta Roriz. If the student felt 
that this example was Tinto Roriz dominated he/she should have said so, to reassure 
the Examiner of his knowledge. Instead the Examiners are left with  the impression 
that the student has no gr asp of Portuguese grape varieties.  It is therefore hard to 
give many marks for the answer, despite some of the reasoning being sound. The 
same candidate correctly indentified Vinho Verde but put Verdejo as the main 
variety. This was a talented taster who could have passed if they had not made a 
succession of such errors. We hope he/she will brush up on their finer points of 
varietal knowledge before next year‟s exam. 
c) As a variation of point a) above, the Examiners sometimes have the impression that 
the candidate probably does know what a classic style tastes like, but manages to give 
the opposite impression by „shoe-horning‟ a wine into a given answer. So for instance 
a candidate who tasted a Cabernet Franc and identified it as a Nebbiolo. The note 
stated: “…a high tannin variety. Full body, medium -high alcohol, medium acidity; 
consistent with Nebbiolo”. The wine did indeed have high tannins and was (for a red 
Loire) quite full-bodied. An argument for Nebbiolo could have garnered good points. 
===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
But we all know that Nebbiolo is, above all, a variety of high tannins and high acidity. 
If a candidate feels that a wine is Nebbiolo but does not have those traits in 
abundance, then they should say so – i.e. “Although the acidity is only medium, the 
high tannins and m edium-high alcohol are consistent with Nebbiolo – which is 
confirmed by...” 
d) Many answers got in a tangle with sweet and fortified wines in Paper 3. Again , a lack 
of factual knowledge really hindered their chances. For instance , referring to the 
Rutherglen Muscat as un -fortified and suggesting that the likely ageing period was 
around 2 years.  
e)  As ever, spelling was an issue. The Examiners are not concerned about „normal‟ 
spelling mistakes but candidates simply have to learn how to spell the classic 
wines/wine terms. Examples this year were Prosecco from „ Valdibadore‟;  „ Greuner 
Veltliner‟; „Method Champanoise‟; “Botrutis”. They have to be mentioned to indicate 
how easily a candidate‟s credibility can be compromised. There was also some 
confusion between Albarino and Alvarinho.  
f) Learn how classic wine styles are made and labelled (we assume this is also helpful 
for the theory exams!). More than one candidate correctly identified Prosecco but 
suggested it was made by the injection of CO2. Someone else though t it was made 
with Muscat; others that it originates primarily from Tuscany and Piedmont. Other 
errors included Rueda DOCG, Bordeaux Superiore, and Napa AOC; Vinho Verde, 
Greco di Tufo and Soave offered as grape varieties; the Solera system used for port 
production  
 
5. A General Suggestion 
The choice of when to sit the exam is entirely down to the candidate but bearing in mind the 
cost and, most importantly, the limited number of attempts allowed, the Examiners‟ 
suggestion would be to take the Practical Ex am only when you feel ready to pass it. To 
perform very poorly is disheartening and, contrary to what some believe, little will be learned 
in the process. The exam is simply three sets of 12 wine questions made more difficult by the 
pressure and intensity of exam conditions. Such 12 wine questions can be practised outside 
exam conditions and only when you feel consistently confident in your abilities should you 
take the final plunge.  
This year‟s practical contingent contained some outstanding candidates and many good ones 
who showed the potential to pass in the near future. The overall picture is made to look 
much worse than it is by up to 25 candidates who showed from early on in each paper that 
they did not have the requisite background knowledge to succeed at this stage in their 
studies. 
 
Paper 1 
Question 1 asked for the origin as closely as possible. Several candidates simply put Côte de 
Beaune. They were correct but they failed to get maximum marks by not even attempting to 
drill down to the actual ori gins of the respective wines. “Closely as possible” does always 
mean what it implies. 
Discussion of oak should normally consider new vs used, timing and type. Some answers 
appeared to rattle off pre -prepared notes regarding barrel -fermented Chardonnay, wit hout 
===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
thought as to current practices in Burgundy, or what was in their glass. Extended skin 
contact with Chardonnay is not a common practice, nor is 18-24 months oak aging.  
The section comparing relative quality was generally well done, but only the best answers got 
maximum points in estimating the capacity for aging. Candidates need to be more specific in 
their answers, referring to the key issues such as concentration and acidity.   
Question 4 featured three less „obvious‟ wines. However the question pro vided much help 
with identification. The best answers did not necessarily identify all three correctly, but did 
stay calmly logical throughout. Please do not panic if uncertain over origin. One can at least 
consider some of the obvious pointers in the glas s and suggest a possible conclusion based 
on the evidence. 
The commercial angle of this question required a consideration of whether any of these non -
classic styles could be marketed successfully, based (as the question reminded) on what 
could be tasted fr om the glass. Relatively easy marks could be gained by referring to the 
lightness and liveliness of wine 9 being in tune with an increasing demand for wines of that 
style; by simply suggesting that wine 10 managed to attain a certain complexity and intensity 
without recourse to oak and without losing delicacy (again in tune with what many 
consumers would seem to want); or by accepting that wine 12 was obviously a more „difficult‟ 
commercial proposition, combining as it does high alcohol, oak and high acidity. 
It is helpful to mention in these answers the possible route to market of each style. But it is 
only speculative to mention other issues that may have relevance to a marketing strategy, but 
cannot possibly be gleaned from tasting. An example: “Convenience from screwcap closure… 
may catch eye of the adventurous consumer”. 
 
Paper 2 
Overall the best set of Paper 2 answers seen in recent years. 
In Question 1 a surprising number of answers confused Syrah and Grenache, which have 
very distinct characteristics in terms of acidity, colour, use of oak and fruit character.   It was 
also surprising that many found Viognier in several of the wines.   The Hermitage was often 
mistaken for a Grenache blend, possibly because of its high level of alcohol.   
When identifying wine‟s age and maturity, some candidates only considered the current state 
of the wine. To reiterate, answers on maturity should always consider the wine‟s 
future/potential. The best candidates, realising they were dealing with a classic area, 
considered vintage options, not just age in general.  
In Question 2 there was confusion among some about the acid levels of Cabernet Sauvignon 
and Syrah as compared to Merlot.   
In Question 4 c – Quality with reference to the commercial potential of this style  - only the 
best answers grasped what was required: to consider not just the specific commercial 
potential of this wine, but of the style that it represents. So , for instance , most answers 
recognised the Beaujolais but only a few gave a measured analysis of the  potential for the 
style. It was not enough to refer only to the lightness and freshness of the wine in question 
(and therefore its suitability for wine by the glass etc). The best candidates also considered 
how Beaujolais is one of the few areas providing  a solution for those increasing numbers 
looking for a lighter style; and yet how Beaujolais is struggling with younger drinkers, partly 
because of an „image problem‟ but also because the „sparseness‟ of the style does not always 
prove popular with those introduced to wine by modern, fruit-forward, commercial styles. 
===== PAGE 21 =====
21 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
Paper 3 
Unusually, this was the least successfully answered paper, despite being a „classic‟ Paper 3 
i.e. a mix of sparkling, sweet and fortified. High sugar levels make it difficult to judge alcohol 
levels but this does not explain all the problems encountered. 
One candidate this year was on course to pass the whole exam after Papers 1 and 2 and wines 
1-3 of Paper 3. Disaster then struck with the candidate misunderstanding botrytis levels and 
consistently confusing fortified and non-fortified styles. These should be the easiest styles to 
spot with every candidate being able to keep open bottles of Port, Madeira, PX etc . for 
regular tasting practice. Comment from one Examiner:  “An alarming number of candidates 
failed to correctly employ their theory knowledge, and embarrassingly exposed their lack 
of preparation for the exam”. 
Reflecting the general comments at the beginning of this report, candidates must do the 
basic homework e.g. learning res idual sugar levels and alcohol parameters for classic sweet 
wine styles. One otherwise successful candidate nailed the PX but suggested it was 11% 
alcohol. It seems a pity to lose easy marks having made a correct identification.  
However, it is also true t hat many responses contained „rote‟ answers for production and 
maturation, and did not properly use relevant evidence from the glass for support. It is worth 
noting that at no point in the paper were the candidates asked to identify grape varieties. The 
focus was on method of production and detailed structural analysis. Too often candidates 
made quick assumptions about wines, not least from their appearance (especially in 
Question 3) and then fitted their analysis around this position. The failure to break down 
each wine and analyse its structural parts – acidity, sugar, tannins, alcohol – was the 
undoing of many. There also appeared to be simple lack of experience.  
Question 1 - Wines 1 and 2 were well answered. Wine 3 was generally thought to be 
Champagne. Candidates should remember to look beyond the obvious lees -aged character 
and consider the wine‟s complexity, minerality and overall balance before making a final 
conclusion. 
Question 2 - Some candidates took the wording of the question to assume some lev el of 
botrytis was present in all the wines. Only the most confident and well-prepared were able to 
state no botrytis for wine 4. Candidates were often able to recognize the characteristics of 
noble rot, but they did not always identify the correct level o f influence. Judging residual 
sugar and alcohol levels is clearly a skill that many candidates need to practise. Examiners 
realise precise identification of sugar and alcohol is difficult at extreme highs and lows, and 
so leeway is given during the grading. Note that a single number is required, not a range. 
Question 3 - This proved to be the most challenging question in the entire practical exam. 
Most candidates correctly identified the Muscat Beaumes de Venise (or got very close) and 
the Rutherglen Muscat . The rest were very mixed with many students finding fortification 
where there was none. 
Final comment from an Examiner:  “Perhaps candidates have begun to take Paper 3 for 
granted, expecting a flight of rosés, Pinot Noirs, or classified growth Bordeaux t o show up, 
and not properly reviewing the world’s sparking, fortified and sweet wines”. 
===== PAGE 22 =====
22 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
  
===== PAGE 23 =====
23 
The Examiners‟ Report 2010  
The Institute is grateful to the following for 
their support in pursuit of its aims: 
 
PRINCIPAL SUPPORTERS 
 
Austrian Wine Marketing Board 
 
AXA Millésimes 
 
MAJOR SUPPORTERS 
 
The Madame Bollinger Foundation 
 
Vins & Vignobles Dourthe 
 
Constellation Europe 
 
The Esterházy Foundation 
 
ITD Hungary (Wines of Hungary) 
Istituto Grandi Marchi 
 
Ets. J-P Moueix 
 
Maison Louis Jadot 
 
Sanpellegrino 
 
Taransaud Tonnellerie 
 
Villa Maria Group 
 
Viña Errázuriz 
 
The Vintners' Company 
 
Waitrose 
 
SUPPORTERS 
 
Berry Bros. & Rudd 
 
Gonzalez Byass 
 
Lallemand 
 
Opus One 
 
Schloss Vollrads 
 
Südtirol / Alto Adige Wines 
 
The Symington Family Port Companies 