--- PAGE 1 ---

THE INSTITUTE OF MASTERS of WINE

Chief Examiner's Report
2022 Stage 2 MW Exam

The 2022 MW exam saw a return to three exam centres, a date a little closer to our "normal" June date, a greater number of candidates sitting the exam and, I am very pleased to be able to report, pass rates much nearer historic averages. The theory exam had a 30% pass rate (2021 = 20%) and the practical exam a 13% pass rate (2021 = 8%). Although all the effects of the pandemic and associated disruption are not yet completely past, the underlying trend is a good one, and one I do believe will be sustained. Many of the teaching and learning strategies developed in recent, more challenging times will hopefully translate into a further uplift in our pass rates in future years. The candidates who were successful in this year's closed book exam have demonstrated an exceptional level of knowledge and understanding across the broad compass of our subject and are to be congratulated. They gave us well-informed and articulate answers written with confidence and conviction.

What follows in our panel and paper chairs' reports is carefully considered analysis of the papers in general and each of the questions in some specific detail. I urge all candidates who were unsuccessful in this year's exam and also those intending to sit the exam in coming years to read carefully and to be honest with themselves when benchmarking their own level of knowledge and understanding of each of the exam papers. The examiners' feedback provides valuable insight to how the questions might best have been approached and also highlights some of the pitfalls most often seen.

One theme that runs throughout the various examiners' reports is the importance of good, clear communication on the written page (or screen). The way we all communicate is constantly changing, whether this is in the workplace, socially, or in more formal settings. How you communicate to us, the examiners, in the context of our exam is vital. Too often we see good thinking obscured by poor communication. Be sure you can write, or type, at an appropriate pace, with clarity and accuracy. Honing this skill, which is often undervalued, will enhance everything you do, not only for the closed book exams but also in the stage three research paper to come.

I would like to remind all potential exam candidates that they are expected to follow our rules on conduct in and around the exam rooms. Any instances of breaking our rules are taken very seriously; we have a clear policy on how any exam irregularities will be dealt with, available on the student website. Candidates may face jeopardising their future participation in the MW study programme as a result. Please remember that becoming an MW is not just about passing our exams, but also committing to our very high set of professional standards as set out in our code of conduct. Attempting to cheat our exam in any shape or form does not correspond with our values.

Neil Tully MW, Chief Examiner
