                        2019 Theory Examiners' Report

a) Theory Chair report                                 page 1
b) Theory Paper 1                                      page 3
c) Theory Paper 2                                      page 7
d) Theory Paper 3                                      page 10
e) Theory Paper 4                                      page 15
f) Theory Paper 5                                      page 18

                        1
    a) Theory Chair Report ­ Neil Tully MW
This year's theory exam produced 33 passes, representing a 32% pass rate (2018 = 31.25%).
This continues the trend of the last few years which indicates that many candidates are well
prepared across all five theory papers. A good number of candidates this year passed the theory
exam with high marks across all papers; really excellent papers written with authority, clarity and
conviction.
Importantly, marks across all five theory papers were generally consistent at all levels. This is in
contrast to previous years where the examiners often saw quite uneven performance in the theory
exam with, for example strong marks on Papers 1, 2 and 3, and much lower marks on Papers 4 and
5, or conversely, great Papers 4 and 5 and much less successful "technical" papers 1, 2 and 3. This
suggests that candidates are better prepared across the whole exam, and this is to be commended.
However, there were a significant number of candidates with marks some way below the pass mark,
this was often on account of not only a general lack of appropriate knowledge but also a failure to
address the questions being asked. This is a matter raised by examiners on all theory papers.
Candidates are reminded to first read the question very carefully. Much thought and consideration is
put into the wording of our questions, candidates should be under no illusion as to what is being
asked.
Very often the reason for candidates not achieving better marks is that the question answered was
not the same as the question being asked. Candidates must be honest with themselves; do not write
an answer to the question you want to see, but write an answer to the question that is on the page
in front of you. Do not be willfully blind about this. The examiners know exactly what they are
looking for, and obfuscation will not work.
Questions will sometimes ask for critical analysis. This is also an aspect that is often avoided or
overlooked. This element is often at the heart of the question, it is the analysis that will demonstrate
"mastery" to the examiners, therefore candidates who do not address this element of any question
will seriously limit their potential marks. The theory examiners on all papers are looking for evidence
of applied knowledge.
Candidates approaching the exam with English not as their first language are advised to consider
very carefully the best option of whether to have papers translated or to write in English.

                                                        2
b) Theory Exam Paper One - Joel Butler MW

General Comments

The Paper 1 examiners were pleased to see a slight uplift in the overall standard of responses to this
year's paper; although Question 2 was the least well-answered question, the examiners saw many
well thought through answers to the question set.

While the examiners welcome appropriate use of examples, these should be specific and used to
demonstrate a point being made in response to the question, rather than being used as "generic"
examples that do little to serve the candidate's purpose in answering the question. These tend to
indicate an overly "bookish" learning, rather than real world understanding.

Definition of terms needs to be carefully judged. While precision is important, it is not necessary to
slavishly define every term in each question.

The examiners urge candidates to check that facts being used are accurate. Information is available
from many sources, and all may not necessarily be reliable. The examiners noted a number of
inaccurate "facts" from possibly questionable sources.

Q1. Are yield restrictions necessary to produce high-quality wine?

A successful response to this question required finding meaningful connections between various
methods of yield restriction and their impact on wine quality and by doing so arriving at a conclusive
answer. A more "opinion-editorial" approach would have been unlikely to pass.

Generally, the question was well answered; most candidates managed to grasp the essential
understanding that it was about vineyards where yield manipulation was consciously required.
Correctly, they did not spend much time writing about low yielding vineyards based upon old vines,
restrictive soils, etc. Poor time management was an issue for a number of candidates, evidenced by
a paucity of writing, shortage of examples, or leaving out discussion of a key issue such as canopy
management.

The examiners in particular were looking to see where candidates, in evaluating "are" (yield
restrictions necessary) were able to demonstrate "how" (they might be necessary to produce high-
quality wine) in order to answer the question successfully.

The best answers also noted clearly that with new viticultural techniques, new clones, better
understanding of vine balance and the effect of climate change in certain locales, low yields are not
as necessary to producing high-quality wines as they once were. More importantly, there is no `one
size fits all' for lowering yields to produce high-quality grapes.

Q2. Your company has acquired a vineyard which has been producing grapes for bulk wine. How
would you convert the vineyard to high-quality wine production?

                                                        3
This question was approached from a number of different angles by candidates, some choosing to
focus on a single, notional vineyard and others writing in more general terms. Both could have been
successful as long as they considered the main principles and importantly focused on conversion.
Many answers rolled out good information on how to set up and farm a vineyard for high quality,
but didn't necessarily address the real-world issues of converting a vineyard from one purpose to
another.

A number of responses that discussed step by step how to establish a vineyard missed the point of
the question, which is about converting. Many answers missed chances to show mastery and real-
world understanding by too quickly assuming that replanting was the only way to go. It was
important to consider the viticulture issues of conversion: changing the canopy (management),
manipulating water availability/delivery, altering vine density, pruning, row alignment etc.

Examiners found too many papers where the argument presented for conversion used examples not
related to a real bulk wine vineyard type. One paper noted that Chambolle-Musigny producer
(hardly bulk wine area) Frederick Mugnier said that "while spur pruning can be used successfully on
young vines, it is better in time to convert them to cane-pruning to restrict the yields and achieve
more terroir-driven wines." A similar notation from an overachieving grower in the Midi would have
been more accurate and justifiable.

Q3. How can drought tolerance be achieved in viticulture?

This was not a question about climate change.

Candidates were expected to evaluate the viticultural techniques available to achieve drought
tolerance of vines. It was relevant to consider how learnings from regions that have long operated in
near-drought conditions, such as Napa, Mendoza and parts of Australia, may be applied in vineyards
experiencing changing climatic conditions, or indeed in new regions that have hitherto been
considered unsuitable for viticulture due to existing drought conditions. Being Theory Paper 1, the
emphasis should be on viticulture.

Under consideration would be recent research and technologies such as infra-red aerial
photography, as well as important viticultural issues such as adaptive rootstocks, cultivar change,
cover crop and canopy management, improved irrigation regimes and changing appellation
restrictions in non-permitted irrigation areas, not forgetting the issue of actual water availability in
areas where irrigation is permitted.

Passing papers provided solid discussion and examples from around the globe for at least five to six
of these viticultural issues, presented in a balanced manner. The best papers interlinked various
tactics, reflecting the fact that no one single aspect could be solely responsible for managing drought
tolerance.

Less successful responses omitted one or more critical issues such as canopy management, soil
analyses/amendments, or cover crops, and dwelt strongly on water management or selecting
drought-tolerant scions. Very few papers discussed using new hybrids or crosses. The very small

                                                        4
percentage of papers that discussed the important research being done at viticultural research
centers on the subject indicated a significant knowledge gap.

Q4. Mildews continue to blight vineyards. What strategies might a vineyard manager implement
to reduce the risk?

This was a question that could only be answered well if one had a good knowledge of the standard
remedies. Examiners were primarily looking for an informed discussion about what are considered
the two most important mildews: downy mildew and powdery mildew. Botrytis and Phomopsis
could have been included in the discussion, as long as the two primary mildews were more strongly
considered.

The best papers noted that there are many fungicides and treatments available and that they must
be rotated, or not all used together, in order to ensure that the mildews don't develop resistance. It
was important to consider not just copper and sulphur treatments, but also to acknowledge and
explain how alternative, resistant varieties, canopy management, vineyard hygiene, climate
modelling/forecasting, and the critical timing of treatments can reduce mildew damage.

While no one was expected in this paper to be intimate with the exact formulas, candidates should
have considered the differences between contact, local systemic and fully systemic treatments; few
addressed the different modes of action that lie behind a diverse, sustainable approach to
preventing mildew.

The Examiners were looking for a wide-ranging discussion of different strategies, including
organic/biodynamic approaches, in particular noting that there is no easy organic/biodynamic
substitute for using copper sulphate, which is why it is accepted (although now in the EU at much
reduced rates).

Q5. What are the most critical considerations for selecting rootstock when establishing a new
vineyard?

This question was the best answered on the paper. As with Question 4, it required specific discussion
and clear examples that demonstrated the writer's knowledge of rootstock traits, limitations and
consequences for their use. Examiners were looking for papers that properly addressed matters
including:

1. A primary consideration for rootstocks is protection from pests in the soil such as phylloxera and
nematodes.

2. Rootstocks are used to address specific challenges or limitations of a site, such as soil chemistry,
or excess/inadequate water, or soil structure/fertility.

3. The compatibility and health status of the scion.

4. How vine vigour can be impacted; therefore requiring consideration of variety, spacing, vine size,
soil nutrients, salinity.

                                                        5
5. How rootstock choices can affect yield, ripening time, quality and flavour which, in turn, strongly
influence the end goal of wine quality.

6. How the relationship between all of these must be taken into consideration: there is no simple,
single answer to choosing a rootstock.

Good papers had specific examples that supported their discussion, rather than simply enumerating
facts about rootstocks without context. Many papers, for example, noted that nematode presence
was a critical consideration for selecting a rootstock, offering some examples. But then didn't
analyse why, and for what kind of nematode and potential disease impact they may vector, and
under what circumstances.

Good papers also delineated interconnected reasons for using a rootstock; for example to deal with
nematodes and drought tolerance. Several papers also considered how climate change may require
new rootstock use in traditional areas where changing circumstances such as drought conditions
require a new approach.

On the other hand, a number of non-passing papers provided few to no examples of rootstocks
needed for particular issues. Or, if the main reasons for using rootstocks were listed, there was often
a lack of analysis addressing the question: the key considerations when planting a new vineyard.

Q6. Discuss the role of the following factors for producing high-quality grapes:

    - Aspect

    - Vine density

    - Row orientation

Generally, questions such as this offer an opportunity to write on a specific issue and show real
mastery. It was important to bear in mind, however, that this question asked for the issues to be
addressed specifically in the context of high-quality grape production.

Some candidates appeared to have run out of time on this question, possibly as a result of it being
the final question on this paper to have been approached. Even with limited time available, to
achieve good marks it was essential to cover each of the three elements of the question, as the
marks were allocated equally between them.

Some responses simply did not cover sufficient detail, giving just a standard Diploma-type answer
with very few examples and very little demonstration of understanding or analysis.

On the positive side, excellent papers clearly noted the intimate relationship of slope and sun
exposure in a higher latitude site, such as the Graacher Himmelreich on the Mosel, or considered the
issue of wind damage control as a key factor when considering row orientation and density, beyond
the obvious issue of sunlight exposure, changing from a N-S to an E-W line.

                                                        6
c) Theory Exam Paper Two - Meg Brodtmann MW

General Comments

Examiners made a number of comments that apply to all questions on this year's Theory Paper 2.

Examples should be used to support a statement rather than as the statement itself. There was a
very high occurrence of examples cited from the Napa Valley and Bordeaux; more than one
examiner commented on the lack of diversity in the use of examples. Candidates should have an
understanding of what happens in some of the less obvious regions.

Brain dumps and winemaking lists were also commented on ­ as is the case every single year.
Students must demonstrate critical thinking if they are to pass. Students must also understand the
costs related to winemaking procedures. Typos were and are a problem ­ please reread your
answers before submitting.

Students are reminded this is a technical paper so dosage rates are important and must be realistic.
Simply saying `a sufficient amount of x should be added' is not enough ­ students must demonstrate
competence in their understanding of additions and their timings.

Definitions in the introduction are vital and set the scope of the essay. Please do not use
abbreviations unless you have previously defined it (e.g. reverse osmosis (RO)).

Some obvious examples of time-keeping issues appeared. It is still very important to plan the essay
effectively, be concise, use relevant and interesting examples, answer the question and do not run
out of time!

Q1. How can a winemaker manage the impact of oxygen during the winemaking process?

In many cases, candidates did not have the depth of knowledge that was required to answer this
question successfully, whilst those that did shone brightly with a number of excellent
scripts. Structure in this question was crucial as there was a great opportunity to waffle about
oxygen in so many forms. The best answers really focused on the question and were very
competent.

The challenge was to get to grips with how winemakers can manage oxygen, responses that failed to
confront this stood out quickly. There were too many formulaic answers with a simple regurgitation
of facts rather than providing an actual answer to the question as set.

Many candidates concentrated on what oxygen does rather than discussing how a winemaker can
manage the impact of oxygen. We were not just asking the effect of oxygen on wine but the
techniques to manage those outcomes. Candidates are urged to cover the entire winemaking
process in an orderly manner and cover a range of wine styles. The best candidates used a
methodical approach where they discussed the impact and then how that impact could be managed.
It is important to remember that oxygen contact has both negative and positive impacts.

                                                        7
Q2. Evaluate the options available to the winemaker wishing to make wine with a lower level of
alcohol.

Relatively few candidates attempted this question, but those who did generally provided strong
responses. Those that were not as successful tended to put forward a list of the processes involved
without sufficient critical analysis on the pros and cons of the various methods ­ the question clearly
stated `evaluate', not `tell us all about how to make wine with a lower level of alcohol'.

What did we want? Options that should have been considered included picking dates, site selection,
varieties, water additions, yeast choice, vessel type, stopping fermentation, and post fermentation
options such as blending, dealcoholisation via spinning cone, reverse osmosis and vacuum
distillation.

Please keep up to date with changes to winemaking laws. For example, Australia can now add water
to juice/must to lower the potential alcohol to no lower than 13.5%.

Q3. Explain the procedures that might be followed in the winery to deal with rot-degraded fruit.

This was a question which prompted a good number of responses, however candidates did not score
well if they were not fully informed on the issues at hand. It was not possible to produce a
satisfactory response based only on partial knowledge. The answer needed some careful planning
and a few scripts seemed to rush headlong into answering without evidence of a structured
approach. A lack of structure sometimes resulted in main points being missed from answers.
Examiners also commented on a narrow range of examples only being used.

A number of candidates gave us a paragraph or two on noble rot; this was not required. The best
answers covered the whole winemaking process from reception to end of maturation. Vineyard
choices were not to be considered as the question clearly stated `in the winery'.

Candidates should have given a definition of what constitutes rot-degraded fruit. Red and white
grapes may have been covered separately. If candidates had broken down the winemaking process
in to its parts it would be possible to clearly define what measures could be taken.
Thermovinification should have been a consideration.

Q4. With new French oak barrels becoming increasingly expensive, what alternative options and
techniques are available to the winemaker wishing to make high-end wine?

A question answered by a good number of candidates, but very often using examples limited to only
Bordeaux and the Napa Valley, which does not indicate a truly global perspective.

This was not just an oak alternative question; plenty of candidates gave us great information on
different oak sources, different wood types and wood formats, but very few discussed other vessel

                                                        8
types (with/without oxygen transfer rates), use of lees, tannin, white wines, sparkling wines,
Madeira and different ways of getting oxygen contact with the wine.

Very few candidates managed to define `high-end wine' ­ concentration, longevity, complexity,
balance. These factors are not only seen in red wines.

The best responses considered what a French oak barrel can give to a wine and then discussed
alternatives to achieve the same end result. These candidates also discussed techniques to add
complexity and concentration to wines that did not involve oak contact. A good response to this
question requires more than a list of which winemaker is doing what.

Q5. Consider the impact of rosé winemaking techniques on wine quality. Are paler-coloured rosé
wines better quality?

Generally, students struggled with this question with very little consideration being given to the
"impact of rosé winemaking techniques on wine quality" part of the question. Most candidates
focussed on colour extraction without considering other winemaking processes that impact on wine
quality. As a result, many aspects of the specific winemaking processes for rosé were ignored.
Picking time and grape varieties were largely ignored as were fermentation, residual sweetness and
techniques for adjusting colour. Temperature of time on skins was rarely mentioned, despite it
having a big effect on colour extraction.

Lack of definitions in the introduction was often a problem. There was also very little reference to
the actual impact of winemaking on quality. As a Paper 2 question, a response from a marketing /
Paper 4 point of view would not have been appropriate.

This was a question where candidates should have covered the entire winemaking process in a
logical manner, commenting on how various processes impact on quality.

Q6. To what extent is it possible for producers of tank method sparkling wines to match the style
and quality of wines produced by the traditional method?

This was a clear question, avoided by many, which exposed a number of candidates' lack of up-to-
date knowledge of sparkling wine production of all types and styles.

Too many candidates did not answer the actual question, preferring to write about how Prosecco
and Champagne are made without referring to the question of quality and at which steps quality
could be influenced throughout the entire production process. Where Sekt was mentioned, most
candidates took for granted that Sekt is always made from Riesling which demonstrated a lack of
awareness of today's premium Sekt production with Burgundian varieties.

Quality in sparkling wine production does not just come from ageing on lees; every part of the
winemaking process can impact on the final quality of the wine and candidates should have covered
this. As a result, very few considered the fact that any given method is not a guarantee of quality ­ it
is the process within those methods that determines the outcomes.

                                                        9
d) Theory Exam Paper Three - Caroline Gilby MW

General Comments

Many of the questions on this year's Theory Paper 3 required thought and analysis rather than
simply trotting out a pre-prepared essay. As ever, strong candidates demonstrated appropriate
technical knowledge, supported by real world evidence and examples. However, too many lacked
factual knowledge or the ability to adapt their answers.

One examiner commented that a number of candidates appeared to reproduce pre-prepared essays
vaguely relevant to the question, without focussing sufficiently on the perspective of the question.
Such a strategy is unlikely to be successful, as any such answer is likely to include much that is
irrelevant and to omit much that is relevant. Another complaint was that some candidates limited
the focus and ground to be discussed in their introduction, but without justification.

Examiners also commented that too often examples were not well used; they tended to be `dropped
in' briefly rather than incorporated into a critical discussion. There was also a number of otherwise
good candidates who limited their examples to the Southern Hemisphere rather than showing
evidence of global wine knowledge.

It bears repeating that Paper 3 is a technical paper and it is expected that candidates will have a firm
grasp of some key factual and numerical information. EU limits for SO2 use and units, being clear
about whether the numbers refer to total or free SO2; typical levels of free SO2 for various styles;
actual values for pH; permitted and actual usage levels for common wine additives; pore sizes for
filtration ­ this is all key knowledge for MWs. It is worth double-checking these too - numbers like
100 g/l SO2 or 45 micron filters cropped up. Vague comments like "lower levels of SO2" are not
sufficient ­ actual numbers are required. Inaccurate use of "sulphur" instead of sulphites or sulphur
dioxide still crops up regularly, and while this may be widespread shorthand among winemakers,
there are important differences between sulphur as an element and its compounds. Another
bugbear is candidates who believe that "brett" is bacterial ­ Brettanomyces is a yeast species and
yeast are a completely different kingdom of life to bacteria. Similarly, TCA is not a bacterial problem
and VA is not a microbial problem in itself but may be the result of microbial metabolism.
Unfortunately, errors like these undermine confidence in the candidate. Technical knowledge and
topics such as QA/QC may not be the most glamorous part of the wine industry, but they are critical
in ensuring wine reaches the consumer in sound condition.

In general candidates who did not pass wrote superficial answers that were descriptive rather than
analytical, lacked examples and numbers. There were also a few frustrating candidates who wrote
well but didn't answer the question so could not score good marks.

                                                       10
Q1. Explain which pre-bottling treatments and QC analyses you would consider most important
for an inexpensive, organic, vegan wine.

Key understanding:

· Need for pre-bottling treatments and QC analyses in general; risks if not undertaken ­ practical
    risks in terms of impact on wine, and commercial and legal/regulatory risks.

· Market positioning and category (inexpensive, vegan, organic); factors affecting choices of
    treatments, taking account of relevant regulation and cost of treatments.

· Awareness of production pressures of inexpensive wine ­ likely to be high volume, quicker winery
    throughput (no time for barrels, natural clarification etc).

· Awareness of legislation for organic wine ­ must comply with EU or other applicable rules which
    specifies permitted additives and processing techniques (e.g. no electrodialysis, reverse osmosis
    etc). Lower sulphite levels than non-organic wine.

· Understanding of implications for vegan claim ­ no animal products even as processing aids.

This question required candidates to think about implications of the specified parameters. Most
candidates did understand that the question was meant to cover one wine with all these
parameters, but some considered three different wines. An inexpensive wine should have been
defined. Markets do vary, but a 20 Euro wine is hardly inexpensive for most. It was not helpful to
use examples of premium wines such as classed growth Bordeaux or Ridge to illustrate this answer.
It was also reasonable to expect that an inexpensive wine needed to be stable, clear, free from hazes
and deposits and possibly would contain residual sugar, and would likely need to be prepared
quickly and in large volumes.

Many answers were let down by lack of awareness of permitted additives and treatments under
organic regulations ­ so proposing electrodialysis, CMC, sorbic acid, PVPP or Velcorin were errors.
Knowledge of permitted sulphite levels, at least for EU and other key markets like USA, was
required. Once again, some candidates used sulphur and sulphite as interchangeable, which is
incorrect.

Good candidates discussed the implications of reduced protection at lower SO2 levels and the need
to pay attention to hygiene, filtration and pH management. A number of candidates were not aware
of what vegan meant ­ it's not just about ingredients but also any animal derived products as
processing aids even if not detectable in the final wine. This has implications for traceability at all
stages and limits the range of fining products that can be used. Candidates writing poor answers
lacked factual knowledge and tended to write general QC answers rather than thinking about the
question and in some cases, time was wasted covering earlier parts of the winemaking process.

                                                       11
Q2. What steps should a winemaker take, in preparation for bottling and at bottling, to
prevent microbial spoilage? Consider both red and white wines.

Key understanding:

· Microbial spoilage can occur at any stage of the winemaking process.

· Prevention is better than cure. In many situations cure is not possible.

· Hygiene is the number one rule in preventing microbial spoilage.

This question required a definition of microbial spoilage. Microbiological spoilage organisms
can be any which are unwanted at a particular stage (but typically bacteria and yeast) and
may include fermentation yeast or malolactic bacteria that had been desirable during
winemaking but can cause spoilage in bottle. This includes those organisms which produce
off-flavours, odours, colours, or precipitates, or refermentation in bottle, or have the
potential to do so. Such faults could include volatile acidity (VA), ethyl acetate (EA),
Brettanomyces, taints, mousiness, geranium taint and yeast spoilage. Cork taint is not
considered microbial spoilage. The risks differ for red and white wines primarily because red
wines have no/very low levels of malic acid and are usually fermented dry.

It was much harder to write a well-structured essay without defining the major risks and
implications and many candidates simply wrote about microbial spoilage in general, which
tended to result in superficial answers. Particular weaknesses noted included confusing free,
total and molecular SO2; errors on filtering and pore sizes; confining the answer to SO2
management; lack of coverage of hygiene, gas management and temperature control;
confusing VA with Acetobacter.

As one examiner highlighted, "It has been raised previously but the same applies again this
year ­ a technical question requires a technical answer." Here one of the more pertinent
points was free and total sulphur dioxide. In very simple terms, free sulphur dioxide levels at
bottling should be between 25 ­ 35mg/L or 0.8ppm molecular. Special cases e.g. bulk wines
or dessert wines may go up to 40mg/L. It is of great concern that 56 candidates, or 65% of all
that answered this question, either provided levels outside this range, didn't mention any
level or discussed total sulphur dioxide as the preventative level for microbial spoilage.

In addition, lots of essays suggested candidates think winemakers use a lot of chemical
processes to make/finish their wines rather than `good old fashioned' attention to detail,
sound judgement, and hygiene control or oxygen management. The chemical processes that
were regularly mentioned as standard practice include DMDC, sorbic acid, velcorin,
lysozyme and chitosan. A considerable number of candidates implied that applying these
and other additives at the time of bottling was normal practice rather than
showing/explaining remedial steps and processes prior to getting it to this point. Trying to
fix, in the case of this topic, microbial spoilage just prior to bottling is near impossible and
candidates didn't grasp this. Some candidates clearly felt that big wineries/facilities need to
have a more rigorous bottling hygiene/cleaning regime than small wineries/facilities.

                                                       12
Q3. Describe a comprehensive QA and QC system a large winery should implement for the
management of dry goods.

Key understanding:

    · A full written procedure is put in place so all departments at the winery understand
         the process to ensure dry goods are received, stored and utilised to enable a wine to
         be produced, bottled and stored in the correct and safe manner, being aware that
         wine is a food product and consumer safety is paramount.

    · Dry goods must also match any brand specifications. A QA/QC system must include
         flow diagrams, HACCP and be able to pass an annual supplier audit and with
         adequate records for an annual external audit like British Retail Consortium (BRC) or
         other audits. Storage conditions should also be considered, to avoid damage or
         contamination.

This answer required a definition of QA/QC. It also required a definition of dry goods, which
should include all packaging goods (bottle, cask or any other vessel, closure, cartons,
dividers and labels) plus any products used in the winemaking e.g. yeast, enzyme, tartaric
acid, fining agents and oak barrels.

Not many candidates tackled this question, but good answers showed clear practical
knowledge and offered good examples. Some candidates wasted too much time discussing
procurement procedures or managing supply of goods which are distinct from QA/QC
systems. Weak answers just did not cover sufficient ground.

Q4. What are the key factors to consider in drawing up a technical specification for:

a white dessert wine bottled at source with 150 g/l of residual sugar; and an entry-level
red wine imported in bulk with 4g/l of residual sugar.

Key understanding

    · Candidates should show understanding that the key objective of technical
         specifications is to ensure wines arrive with the importer in a good quality and
         chemically stable condition for sale to the consumer (white) or for final treatment
         prior to bottling (red).

    · Should also highlight the potential spoilage which may arise in a very sweet wine and
         in a dry red wine. Should also understand what a typical specification should cover.
         There will be differences between a bottled specification and a bulk one.

    · What are the implications and risks for those specific wine styles (high level of
         residual sugar etc.) and likely price points? Note that many purchasers may not even
         consider a technical specification necessary for smaller volumes of a (likely) premium

                                                       13
         sweet wine bottled at source. Highlight what treatments are required for a wine
         bottled at source and then shipped in bottle and a wine shipped in bulk and prepared
         for bottling at destination.
This was not a popular question but should have been straightforward as it was quite simply
about product specifications ­ most of which are applicable to both types of wines in the
question and then consideration of the different products and risks. Weak answers again
talked about quality control in general or offered a list of wine treatments rather than
considering what needs to be in a specification and why. Good answers included factual and
practical detail.

                                                       14
e) Theory Exam Paper Four ­ Simon Thorpe MW

Q1. Why do a growing number of large retailers prefer to focus on own and exclusive
labels over third-party brands? Is this good for the wine category?

This question covers a subject for which candidates are likely to have been well-prepared,
however it is the application of that knowledge which makes the difference between a pass
or a fail. The arguments as to why retailers are focusing more on own and exclusive labels
were covered well and candidates who had good data concerning growth, margins etc. did
well in the first half of the answer. The examiners did find a lot of inaccuracies or errors on
statistics though ­ some of which betrayed a lack of understanding of the market. Better to
not quote a fact if you cannot be sure it is correct.

The second half of the question is more subjective and requires a structured and well-
argued opinion. Perhaps a SWOT is one way of doing this? No right or wrong answer ­ but
strong analysis led to good scores, lack of insight and too much generalisation led to lower
scores.

Q2. How do wine consumers in mainland China decide what wine to buy and what are the
implications of their choices for producers and distributors?

Candidates without a good working knowledge of the Chinese market would have been well
advised to avoid this question. Besides that, and the ever-present need to be able to present
a cogent and plausible argument, this is fundamentally a question with two parts. The first
is fact based ­ around consumer behaviour. The second requires more analysis and possibly
brings in comparisons with producer and distributor choices in other more established
markets.

Examiners were looking for the ability to be able to demonstrate a thoughtful assessment of
the situation and not to generalise. Just knowing the facts is not enough. The pass rate on
this question was low, and it was attempted by a small percentage of candidates. Given this
is a fundamentally important market for the wine industry, and we are testing knowledge on
a global basis, perhaps this performance points to the need for future candidates to focus
more on an international aspect to their learning.

Q3. Consider the growth in demand for vegan, organic and sustainable wines. What can
and should the wine industry be doing in response?

A "hot" topic and a very popular question which candidates who considered their approach
carefully answered well. This is a broad question which requires careful thought on how to
structure the answer. The examiners thought a PESTLE approach could be good, and this
ought to facilitate comparisons of different markets, different elements in the supply chain,
different consumer priorities and different approaches by the wine industry.

Candidates definitely need to remember that this is a Paper 4 question, so although some
mention may be made of vineyard and winery practices, this should be dealt with in the
context of the commercial implications. For example, if it is accepted that the growth of
demand for organic wines will continue, what analysis needs to be undertaken before a
winery should consider converting to organic production? What is the premium achieved
for organic wines and in which markets is this premium most pronounced?

                                                       15
Good answers demonstrated an understanding of commerical scenarios in a number of
markets internationally and were able to analyse the pros and cons well. Those less good
answers lacked analysis, spoke solely to facts and tended to concentrate on one market.
This question brings in many elements: It showed the need for global understanding and
examples, the need to structure an answer carefully, not to flood the answer with too much
content and therefore lose clarity and above all it needed analysis.

Q4. Can social media drive brand loyalty in the wine category?

Another "hot" topic ­ or at least a well-trodden path. The angle here is to concentrate on
the concept of brand loyalty ­ it's no good to simply list a series of successful social media
campaigns. The question alludes to wine brands building a community, encouraging their
customers to become more engaged with their business and to continue to do this.

Many candidates attempted this question, which is understandable. There were some very
good answers demonstrating that candidates could show great and differentiated examples
of the commercial success of social media engagement. However, there were many
"identikit" answers ­ somewhat safe answers without evidence of analytical thinking which
did not achieve high marks. It's important to remember that a few good, relevant examples
from different markets and a clarity of analytical thought go a long way.

Q5. How can the fortified wine category evolve to address current consumer trends?

A strong response to this question on a generally well-understood subject would not have
needed a complicated structure. There is a need to quote some data in terms of market
growth or decline, and then a need to work out whether to approach the question from the
consumer angle or the production angle.

Either approach can be successful, but it seems picking out consumer trends and applying
them to existing or possible future product and proposition developments was the optimal
approach. Definitely a need to tick a few boxes around increase experiential/tourism
opportunity, lighter drinking (cocktails), heritage/authenticity engagement. Miss too many
of these out and it becomes difficult to pass. A good number of candidates did cover a lot of
the content.

Interestingly, there were some answers which showed a patronising or slightly flippant
approach ­ assumptions around old fashioned businesses unable to adapt themselves to the
"modern" consumer. Such generalisations do not indicate that both sides of an issue have
been considered.

Q6. Outline the key changes in the fine wine investment market over the past decade.
How do you see this developing over the next 10 years?

In order to be successful in this question it was important to have concentrated on the
"investment" market and not talked about fine wine in general. Therefore it was essential
to be able to quote statistics (size of market in 2009 and 2019) and areas of the global
market (both from a production and destination perspective) which have changed most
radically in the past decade.

                                                       16
Some essays failed to address the second half of the question at all. Some things to consider
would have been whether Bordeaux remains a key element for investment, will Burgundy
retain its importance, what other regions might become investment opportunities? Will
anything particularly drive investors and if so why?
There were some excellent answers here, candidates with good, in-depth knowledge who
addressed the question correctly. Where some candidates fell short was mostly when
claims about the future direction of the market were unsubstantiated with any evidence or
analysis, or if the candidate simply could not demonstrate enough knowledge.

                                                       17
f) Theory Exam Paper Five - Susan McCraith MW

General Comments

These comments build on those found in previous Examiners' Reports, so do consult those
as they are also relevant to this year's exam.

We tend to find that in Paper 5 a lot of marks sit in the 55-64 `Below Threshold' bracket.
This is because there are not necessarily right or wrong answers to these questions, it's all
about arguing your point authoritatively and insightfully. Opinions need to be based on
evidence and attributed and whilst you should come down on one side or the other if you
are asked to, it is often appropriate to show the complexity and nuance of certain issues. In
other words, we are looking for sophisticated thinking at MW level. You need to
demonstrate your skills of analysis, evaluation and argument. Some candidates may have
written a comprehensive answer, but not quite passed either because they were more
descriptive than critically analytical, or took a simplistic approach, or didn't demonstrate
enough experience. The examiner is not just looking for what you know, but also the quality
and maturity of your thinking and communication skills.

We have noticed that introductions are getting better year by year. Getting the introduction
right is critical. Set out your definitions and what you're going to write about and then stick
to this structure. Use signposts to indicate to the reader where they are in the essay e.g.
`turning to the subject of...'. This requires good essay planning which only comes with a lot
of practice.

Remember to answer the question set, not leap on the opportunity to deliver a pre-
prepared essay, for example on climate change. Give a balanced perspective, show that you
have considered all sides and give original examples from around the world.

On a more practical level, you need to write two consistently good essays, there's no point
writing one very good one if the average is pulled down by a second, less comprehensive
answer. Managing your time in the exam here is key. Leave time to proof-read your work.

Q1. What is the greatest threat currently facing the wine industry and how should this be
addressed?

In addressing this question, awareness of various potential threats needed to be shown
(climate change is an obvious contender and not to mention it was a serious omission) and a
justification given for selecting which one was the greatest. Many candidates understood
this and successful passes provided depth with good examples and understanding. They also
referenced other threat areas which communicated a good perspective. Definitions needed
to be clear. The question specified `the wine industry' so the entire supply chain needed to
be considered. Weak candidates were too narrow and failed to provide enough grasp of the
key range and nature of challenges. To concentrate just on one aspect e.g. viticulture led to
an incomplete answer. However, there does need to be sufficient detail on the identified

                                                       18
key threat. Many people selected climate change here and the temptation to revert to pre-
prepared material sometimes meant the focus was not retained on the actual question.
A broad, balanced perspective was required and a recognition that some threats can also be
opportunities. Some answers spent too much time on identifying and describing the threat
and did not leave enough to talk about solutions, which was an important part of the essay.
Arguments needed to be backed up by evidence and examples and not rely solely on opinion
or sweeping statements.

Q2. Does a changing climate place greater emphasis on terroir or on choice of grape
variety?
Candidates needed to demonstrate the understanding that the climate is changing, not just
warming, giving rise to both predictable and unpredictable consequences. This was an
interesting question to think about due to the interplay between terroir and grape variety.
Answers that fell short of the mark generally did so for failing to answer the question posed
i.e. there was too much temptation to describe rather than analyse.
The question required consideration of both aspects but the candidate needed to present a
direct answer and strong argument in conclusion, justifying their choice via an analysis of the
full range of challenges and opportunities.
Some answers lacked specific examples and were too theoretical, lacking depth and detailed
analysis.

Q3. Does wine have a significant role to play in a healthy lifestyle?
This should have been quite a straightforward question but examiners' comments are
peppered with comments such as `superficial', `lacking in detail', `rambling'. There were
several unsubstantiated, sweeping statements that did not reflect a considered, balanced
perspective. A nuanced approach was needed, considering a wide range of different groups
and circumstances.
Defining a healthy lifestyle was very important. Answers needed to show knowledge of
medical reports and research both for and against wine consumption in a global perspective.
A discussion of what constitutes moderation was needed. Wine should have been
considered within the context of all alcoholic drinks. There were some unsubstantiated, wild
claims. Good answers showed nuance and tackled the conflicting perspectives in a clear and
well-structured format.

                                                       19
Q4. How responsible is the wine industry?
This question elicited relatively few responses. Many answers lacked depth or concentrated
on one main topic. A definition of `responsible' was key as well as a consideration of all
aspects of the supply chain. Good answers looked at the main ways the industry could be
challenged on its responsibility and put wine into context with other similar industries.
Social, ethical and environmental issues should have been covered with original examples
from all over the world to show a global perspective.

Q5. What makes wine authentic?
This proved a thought-provoking question and the best answers were very interesting to
read. There was a necessity to have a broad perspective but also strong views and to back
up one's position strongly with key arguments, critical analysis and a rigorous approach. Too
few answers took this robust approach and were overly descriptive or lacking in depth. This
question led some people to waffle whimsically, while others had too narrow a focus.
Defining `authentic' was very important. Some people focused solely on natural wines but
the question was much broader than this. Good answers encompassed all elements of the
supply chain and had fun discussing the different aspects.
Good answers considered why authenticity matters and to whom: authentic to a sense of
place, or a style, or a mode of production, to someone's vision, or to a brand identity? You
could have looked at whether single vineyards are considered more authentic than regional
blends. Whether natural, organic, biodynamic wines are more authentic. Is using clay jars or
amphorae more authentic, or just traditional? What about fake wines and counterfeits?
How much does the consumer care about authenticity and does that depend on the
purchase price? There was much ground to be covered here.

                                                       20
