Practical Examiners Report 2025 Stage Two MW Exam

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................2
Paper One Report: Paper Chair, Peter Mitchell MW ......................................................................................3
Paper Two Report: Paper Chair, Lisa Perrotti -Brown MW............................................................................5
Paper Three Report: Paper Chair, Ulf Sjödin MW .........................................................................................7.

                                                                                                                                         1
Introduction

Practical Chair: Peter Marks MW

This year's practical exam resulted in 16 passes out of 132 candidates sitting the exam. The pass rate of 12.1% is the
same as last year when we had 17 passes, but there were more candidates (140) sitting the exam in 2024. Before
moderation there were only5 clear passes; thus, 11 additional passes were achieved after moderation.
Paper twowas the most challenging for candidates with only 12 passes (50.3% average mark) whilpeaper one had
20 passes (53.3% average mark) andpaper three scored the best with 23 passes (56.1% average mark). Two of the
three averages are lower than last year's (55.5%, 55.1% and 53.4% foprapers one, two and three respectively);paper
three improved on its 2024 average. Worse still is the number of candidates earning an overall grade of D or lower:
41.7% this year, compared with about on-tehird in 2024.

Some might interpret these results as the examiners making the practical exam more difficult, but that is not the
case. In fact, more recent candidates--those sitting the practical exam for the first or second tim--e accounted for
eight of this year's 16passes. This indicates that passing the practical exam is achievable. During my moderation of
the papers, however, two themes stood out; these are also highlighted in tphaeper chairs' reports.

The first theme was an inability to read the wine accurately. Too many candidates started on the wrong foot because
they could not reliably identify the wine's componen--tsalcohol, acidity, tannin and residual sugar. Often a candidate
will latch onto a single feature in a wine's appearance, aroma and flavour characteristics and then justify that initial
assumption by forcing the wine's components or structure to fit it. We call this shoehorning, and it was a significant
issue this year.

This problem was especially evident when wines were not easily identifiabl--e for example, the mixed bag onpaper
2, questionthree --where many candidates failed to consider alternative possibilities and left themselves little room
to earn marks. A candidate who reads the wine correctly and makes a logical deduction about its origin or variety
can still achieve a pass. By contrast, poor tasting ability not only limits marks for identification but also leads to
incorrect statements about the wine's qualitys,tyle and commercial appeal.

Recognising quality is vitally important: it accounted for more than 20% of the marks in this year's exams. This was
the other major reason many candidates failed. For example, calling a Côtes du Rhône (Paper 2) a Châteaun-eduuf-
Pape, or describing the Ruby Port in paper three as a vintage Port, undermines the examiner's confidence.
Candidates should not panic when asked to describe quality in a particular conte--xtfor example, "globally" p(aper
two) or "with reference to its classification"p(aper three). Instead, pause and think carefully about precisely what the
examiners are asking.

We understand thatwine #11 onpaper one may have caused confusion because the wine was a blend while the
question asked for a grape variety. Peter Mitchell MW discusses this in his report. If a wine is included in the exam
as a single varietal, that indicates that the label or the published daeitls refer only to a single varietal. For reasons of
confidentiality, we cannot discuss the exact details with producers in advance; if it later emerges that a small
percentage of another variety was present, wewill of course take that into account when marking.

Each of thepaper chairs has written an excellent, detailed report with valuable insights, so please review these
carefully and take their advice to heart. I should also mention that the exam and study progrmame teams recently
updated thepractical exam guidelines, and this can be found on theresources page of the MW website. This
document, together with thexaminer reports, is an invaluable resource to help you succeed in the MW exam.

                                                                                                                                         2
Paper One Report: PaperChair, Peter Mitchell MW

General comments

Paper one this year was designed to allow candidates to show their understanding of the wines in terms of quality,
winemaking and evolution. Each question also included some reference to style and the ability to succinctly describe
this is an important part of theskill set for wine professionals. I am glad to say most achieved this successfully.
There are still too many candidates who show significant gaps in theory knowledge about how styles of wine are
made, and a number seem to struggle with reading acidity, especially when there is some residual sugar involved.
That said, with around a quarter of candidates scoring over 60%, there were a good number of passes with a handful
of truly outstanding papers. Once again, I would stress the need to carefully read the question and answer it as it is
asked ­ too many dropped valuable marks on questionfour, part a by not doing this.

Questionone­ Sauvignon Blanc/Semillon

Generally very well answered with the vast majority of candidates passing this question.
Identification of the varieties was straightforward and virtually every candidate succeeded in this. With a limited
number of possible origins, candidates were expected to give strong arguments to achieve maximum marks.
There was a clear stylistic and quality difference between the two wines and the superb quality of woinnee was
expected to be appreciated. For full marks candidates needed to be in Pess-aLcéognan and the best considered
other possible origins in their argument.
Whilst part c was mostly well answered, some candidates struggled with winemaking, missing oak and seeing
malolactic conversion where there was none and not appreciating the outstanding quality of woinnee.

Questiontwo­ Chardonnay

Being so malleable, Chardonnay has become one of the more challenging varieties to pin down the origins of and
this was reflected by very few of the marks available being awarded for getting the origin correct. Ncaondidate
identified all the origins correctly­ indeed over half did not get a single origin exactly right, however many still
managed 5 or 6 marks out of the allotted 8 if their reasoning was sound and their conclusion plausible.
Most candidates correctly identified the variety and remembered to draw on all four wines in their arguments.
There were some marks collected for those who went with Chenin Blanc, but very few for any other options. Style
was generally well answered, quality and maturity less universally so.
Many candidates did not pick up on the maturity of wintheree or the potential longevity of winesix, and whilst the
majority recognised winefour as unexceptional, a significant minority thought it was exceptional quality despite the
rather clumsy oak use.
Wines five and six seem, understandably, to have caused the greatest difficulty for origin, with Burgundy being the
most popular choices.

Questionthree­ France

The majority were correctly placed in France, with those who went wrong generally favouring Germany or New
Zealand, reflecting the clearly cool climate characters of the wines. Wineeight could fit all three, but less so wine
nine. Wineseven was identified correctly by many, but good marks could be achieved for other fairly neutral
varieties as long as the leesy character and moderate alcohol were picked up on.
Wine nine was a very high quality benchmark example yet nearly as many people went with Pinot Gris as Chenin
Blanc ­ hard to justify with the high level of acidit-yand few who placed it in Vouvray recognised the outstanding
quality of the wine. Paradoxically thoes who went with Alsace Pinot gris often gave better quality and maturity
answers than those who had Vouvray.

Questionfour ­ mixed bag
                                                                                                                                         3
This was a form of question that had not been used before and seems to have caused issues for many candidates.
There were some superb answers to part a) which achieved full marks, but the vast majority of candidates did not
seek to answer the question asti was asked, instead just offering some winemaking details.
Across the three wines part a accounted for 15% of the total marks available on the paper and candidates were
expected to discuss the relative importance of human inputs vs nature to the finished wines, weaving in details of
winemaking and terroir to their answers. The wnies were chosen so that the influence of the winemaker was
increasingly apparent as one moved from winesten through totwelve.
Variety and origin saw candidates on more comfortable terrain and as these were fairly unique styles of wine, this
part was generally very well answered.
Although candidates were not told in the question whether the wines were blends or single variety wines, in part b
of this question it refers to `variety' when wineeleven was in fact a blend dominated by a single variety. Whilst being
a single variety would not preclude the correct identification being made, examiners were aware that this could have
caused minor confusion and therefore markedthis wine bearing this in mind.

                                                                                                                                         4
Paper Two Report: Paper Chair, Lisa Perrotti-Brown
MW

General Comments

This year's paper two exam gave a nod to the growing global demand for a broadening range of red wine varieties
and styles. We introduced a few new question types and esoteric varieties/regions, while also offering a fair number
of classic regions, grapes, and question types.While itwas not our intention to throw candidates curveballs, it was
clear that, when faced with the unknown, some panicked.

Questionone- Cabernet Franc

Cabernet Franc is currently trending and is being adapted to various climates and styles worldwide. This question
explored how different styles are achieved by considering climate, the variety's appeal to modern consumers, and
winemaking techniques.
Part c of the question required candidates to consider carefully what would be the key influences on style and
quality, structuring their answers carefully and being selective in their arguments. Those who identified the grape
easily (and many did) generaly handled the different parts of the question welslk, ilfully discussing the three very
distinct climates (Loire, Argentina, and Tuscany) and their influence on style.
A few candidates managed to earn good points with convincing arguments for Cabernet Sauvignon or Merlot,
placing the third wine in Bordeaux instead of Tuscany.

Questiontwo- the classics ­ Rhône

This was a set of wines from a classic region, withsimply wordedquestions, but it proved challenging for many
candidates. What clearly troubled many was that they couldn't find a Châteauneuf du Pape, Hermitage, or C-Rôôtteie,
because they weren't there.
Many tried to shoehorn in one or all of these origins, with patchy results. Wdoe notexpect everyone to be able to
"nail" a Cornas, but we do expect to see plausible options for a wine of that style, rather than an assumption that it is
whatever the candidate has in mind. Anyone who wasn't in the Rhône for this flight struggled to get many marks.

Question 3- mixed bag - rising star indigenous /non-classic varieties

This was a mixed bag of five wines from five different countries using no-cnlassic/indigenous varieties that are
gaining popularity. A lot of leeway was given when finding the identities of the most esoteric wines in this -luinpe,
namely an Austrian Zweigelt and a Greek Xinomavro. Yet there were a few who correctly identified these. Most
correctly identified the Beaujolais, while the Portuguese Touriga Nacional and Barbera d'Alba largely garnered
logical identifications.
Some candidates were thrown off by part b of this question: "Comment on the quality within the context of wine
globally." This type of questionhas not been asked before, but it is relevant given the esoteric nature of these wines,
which are not necessarily competing commercially against others within their region.
Typically, there may be only one or two examples of Austrian Zweigelt or Greek Xinomavro available on a shelf or
list. So, the question becomes what other wines around the world they might be competing with, and how they
compare qualitatively.
Many points were also lost for "comment on the style and commercial appea­l"a commonly asked question. Too
many of the responses were vague and repetitive, failing to connect comments and conclusions to the content of the
glass.
One potential pitfall inpaper two is candidates relying too much on their noses. It's easy to be misled by the
similarities in aromatic and flavour compounds common to many red wines. Often, these aromatic profiles alone can

                                                                                                                                         5
convince candidates of a wine's identity, leading them to force other import--asnotmetimes more critica--l
characteristics of the wine, such as tannin, body, alcohol, acidity, or oak use, into a mismatched identity.
There was a lot of shoehorning on this year'spaper twoexam, and ultimately, it led to the failure of many candidates.

                                                                                                                                         6
Paper Three Report: Paper Chair, Ulf Sjödin MW

General comments

The examiners of paperthree were quite impressed with this year's set of papers, particularly when it came to the
(critical) focus on quality assessment. In many cases, we saw better arguments than previous years, and many
students showed a good understanding of how different styleosf wines are made. With that said, there were also
students who obviously lack basic knowledge on how fortified or sweet wines are made. Our advice is for everyone
to refresh their knowledge on how different wines arme ade and learn reasonable sugar and alcohol levels for these
wines. It is very hard, if not impossible, to pass the MW exam without knowing how Madeira or Sherry is made.
Students who claim that Tawny Port is aged in a solera system, or that Amontillado Sherry has 14.5% alcohol, should
do some more reading.

Although quality assessment was better this year, we still see students who have problems expressing quality
levels. Since this is the most important part of an MW exam, everyone should practice how to communicate quality
in a clear way. At student seminars, we keep asking for official quality levels when this is appropriate, and in this
paper it was clearly communicated in the third question. We still saw students who gave generic answers although
they were arguing for a region where there are clealyr defined quality tiers. Some students did communicate official
quality levels onquestion three, but not for winesthree, four and six, even though they also had official levels
(Beerenauslese, Reserva and VORS). Even if we don't ask for it specifically, we do expect an official quality level if
there is one andit is relevant.
Commercial position is still a problem for some students. We expect students to tell us where we can find this wine.
On oroff trade? Specialist or supermarket? Michelin Star restaurant or the local pub? Local or international? And
don't forget to use evidence from the glass in the argument!

Questionone­ Riesling

Questionone was designed to give students something to recognize immediately, and the vast majority identified
Riesling as the grape variety. Chenin Blanc was a reasonable option, although the arguments for Chenin relied on
students not noticing the low alcohol inwine three. Hard evidence like alcohol and sugar are often more reliable
than the flavour profile, but wecan get the feeling that students decide the grapes and origin quickly, and then try to
make the sugar and alcohol levels fit the argumentF. irst impressions may not always be correct, so students should
try to be honest with themselves while taking notes.
Many students were in Germany fowr ines one and three, and forwine twowe allowed many New World origins for
a pass mark. Overall, this was the most well answered question opfaper three.

Questiontwo­ Spain

For questiontwo, the Sherry was a banker for most students, and some even referred to that as an argument for
going to Spain on the other two wines, which makes perfect sense. The Cava was also in a rather typical style, so
most students got the country of origin rightG. iven the extremely high quality of the Sherry, all other origins scored
very poorly, since it was hard to find good arguments that fitted all three wines unless in Spain.

Wine five was the hardest one of the paper, but we allowed for many alternative answers as long as they fitted the
light colour and style of the wine. For winemaking and commercial position we expected students to identify the
minimal intervention style of the win,eand we saw some really beautiful answers, but also a surprisingnumber of
students who just dismissed the wine as a simple bulk wine of very low quality.

Questionthree­ mixed bag
                                                                                                                                         7
Questionthree was a mixed bag, so every wine was effectively a question on its own. This is where theory
knowledge was most important, and some students scored very high marks because most of the wines were easily
identified if alcohol and sugar levels were accuratelyanalysed. Although we didn't ask for the origin, most students
understood that quality and commercial position is hard to answer if there is no attempt to identify the origin. It is
difficult to communicate quality in a confident way withoeuvter mentioning a likely origin, but we saw some
successful answers that managed not to mention any origin although it was clear that the student had identified the
wine correctly.
Since we did notask for origin, high marks could be awarded to students who still got the style and quality levels
correct. Mistaking the Tokaj for a Cru Classé Sauternes of equal quality could still yield a pass mark on that question.
On this question, we received some outstanding responses that impressed the examiners. When candidates can
convey the genuine pleasure they experience in tasting a 4-y0ear-old Tawny, that enthusiasm is shared by those
reading the paper. One candidate, foerxample, correctly identified the Tokaji as a Szamorodni and reasoned that
"although the sugar level suggests 5 or 6 Puttonyos, the exceptional quality indicates a producer whose wines would
exceed the minimum sugar levels required for those classificatiosn." It was an insightful observation that instilled
much confidence in the eyes of the examiners.

                                                                                                                                         8
