Theory Examiners Report 2025 Stage Two MW Exam

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................2
Paper One Report: Paper Chair, Rhys Pender MW ........................................................................................3.
Paper Two Report: Paper Chair, Richard Kershaw MW ................................................................................6
Paper Three Report: Paper Chair, Caroline Gilby MW .................................................................................12
Paper Four Report: Paper Chair, James Davis MW .....................................................................................15
Paper Five Report: Paper Chair, Ken MacKay MW ......................................................................................18

                                                                                                                                         1
Introduction

Theory Chair: Beverley Blanning MW

The main observation from the 2025theory exam is that results are improving and candidates are achieving better
grades. Of the 96 candidates sitting this year's theory exam there were 27 passes, a pass rate of 28.1% compared to
19.8% in 2024. It may be cold comfort to those who are reading thisproert having failedtheory, but the overall
standard of papers in 2025 showed a marked improvement on that of recent years. Candidates passing one or more
papers are to be commended for achieving MW standard in at least part of the exam. Only two years atgwoo,-thirds
of candidates sitting the Theory exam failed all papers; that figure is now below 40 per cent.
There was a higher pass rate overall compared to last year, but also a higher percentage of no-pnassing candidates
scoring well on one or more papers. More candidates are passing more paper­sand even if these results are
insufficient to result in an ovearll pass, it is hopefully just a matter of time and experience before they do.
The key question, therefore, is how to convert a pass on a couple of papers to a successful result overall? This is
where the examiners' report is so useful. While it delves into the detail of each question on the exam, it also
highlights recurring general themes that provide the clues to why papers pass or fail. These examiners insights are
invaluable tools, especially for candidates who are unsure of why their essays are not achieving a passing grade.
Some of the more salient points cited by the examinerasre the following:

    · The theory papers require candidates to show critical analysis, yet many essays remain descriptive and
         lacking the analysis required to achieve a passing grade:"Many answers that do not meet required
         standards are purely descriptive and fail to apply knowledge in the context of the questi"on.

    · The examiners point to evidence of rote learning at the expense of understanding.
    · Examples must, in all cases, be relevant. One paper chair comments that ofte"nc,andidates fail to

         understand the purpose of examples".
    · Check facts and examples for accuracy.
    · Candidates are encouraged to critically evaluate source materials, rather than accepting producer claims at

         face value.
    · Any conclusions must be supported by evidence and critical reasoning. This applies not just to the final

         paragraph of an essay, but each point made throughout. It is not enough simply to report what others have
         said.
    · It is difficult to achieve a passing grade if parts of a question are not answered.
    · Candidates are encouraged to challenge assumptions, to show depth as well as breadth, and to `think
         beyond the headlines'.

I wish future exam candidates every success in their studies and trust that the information contained in this report
will serve as a useful guide to achieving a pass in thetheory exam.

                                                                                                                                         2
Paper One Report: PaperChair, Rhys Pender MW

General comments

It is a familiar theme over recent years that many of the same issues tend to hold back the success ratepinaper
one. There were some positives though. One positive this year was that there was a lot of impressive knowledge
demonstrated on thepaper one syllabus. However, this knowledge too often comes across more as book learning
and lacks analysis and insight from the candidate. What will give success in an MW paper is a candidate who can
pull together all their textbook knowledge, link it with re-alilfe practical situations, see the bigger picture and then
come down with their own point of view taking all those things into account, supporting these opinions with global
examples. Often candidates just list the textbook stuaffnd throw in a couple of examples of what people are doing,
missing the crucial analysis.

Another positive this year is that there were a lot of great and diverse examples, not just what was gleaned at
seminars. While this is great to see, an issue for some candidates seems to be the urge to focus too much on
examples. Many students seem concenred with packing in (often interesting) examples without remembering to link
each of these back to contributing to answering the question. This means their essays read more like a list of what
people are doing rather than showing the expected level of anyaslis and consideration of the question.

A couple of general points to consider with laying out an essay. Many students are writing a good introduction,
outlining what they plan to cover, setting the scene, promising a great paper. Yet often, the main body of the essay
fails to address what was promised in the introduction, resulting in the question being poorly answered. Questions
nearly always have a couple of parts to them. Part of it will need theory knowledge, part will need linking to specific
details. Good practice will see every paragraphshowing knowledge, linking it to practical realities, backing it with
examples and showing individual analysis and opinion.

1) How effectively can vineyard pests and diseases be controlled without using agrochemicals?

This was by far the more popular of the section A questions, chosen by over 90% of candidates. There were mixed
results. A lot of answers to this question were overly descriptive, just giving a list of examples of what people are
doing without showing thenecessary analysis. Many students seemed to read the question as "how can pests and
diseases be controlled without using agrochemicals", missing the word "effectively". The word "effectively" signalled
a requirement for analysis, weighing up the complex rael-life difficulties and practical challenges for grape growers
looking to control pests and diseases without using agrochemicals. A lot of papers listed many examples, but
showing an understanding of the challenges and limitations for effective use of tsheecontrols in viticulture
compared with using agrochemicals was often weak.

While it was acceptable to include thoughts on protection from animal pests, some candidates allocated a
disproportionate amount of emphasis here, taking away from the key areas where growers have typically relied on
agrochemicals. Other candidates had thier focus drift off to a more philosophical discussion on organic/biodynamic
viticulture, its costs, quality of grapes and wines, etc. without focusing on specific pest and disease controls. There
also seemed to be some misunderstanding around agrochemicaltshat are allowed in organic viticulture such as
Bordeaux mixture. These were often referred to as a no-nagrochemical option.

The strongest papers focused on the practical challenges of foregoing agrochemicals while showing a solid
understanding of pests and diseases and concluding how effective each control option was.

                                                                                                                                         3
2) `Bacterial and phytoplasma diseases are the greatest threat to vine health today.' Discuss.

This was not a popular question with only four candidates attempting it. The question wasn't asking "write all you
know about bacterial and phytoplasma diseases" but required candidates to look at the key ones, comparing and
contrasting the level of threat o vine health versus other threats (such as mildew, etc.).

3) How can artificial intelligence be used in viticulture to improve the quality of wine grapes?

There was a relatively good pass rate in this question, although the answers were quite mixed. The less successful
candidates spent a lot of time looking at how AI was used in other industries or just being overbliyg picturewithout
offering specific links to grape growing and grape quality. Many failed even to define grape quality in the first place.

The best candidates showed some creative and interesting ways that AI i-sand can be- used, linking back to specific
wine quality parameters they had defined as important measures of grape quality. The key areas of using data to get
accurate and speedy information to growers to allow them to make more precise vineyard decisions and improve
sustainability, was well answered in many essays.
4) To what extent does soil management affect the quality of wine grapes?

This was a straightforward question that allowed students to show their theory knowledge while also affording the
opportunity for some critical thinking, by linking the knowledge back to wine grape quality. Unfortunately, many
candidates took the opportuntyi to show considerable knowledge about options for soil management but failed to
answer the second part of the question linking to quality.

Defining and linking to quality of wine grapes had to be specific, getting down to details on how different
management techniques might affect sugars, acid, tannin, flavour concentration, balance, complexity, yield, etc. Many
students simply referred to "better quality" without any detail.

The best papers showed knowledge of different soil management options, looked at "to what extent" they had an
effect and linked to specific, pr-edefined elements of grape quality. The most concise answers also addressed how
there is no recipe and considered different scenarios where differing management techniques were best suited. As is
often the case, candidates tended to focus on small, hi-gqhuality producers without addressing large volume
producer's issues, an important consideration to make for a mortehorough paper.

4) How do changing rainfall and wind patterns affect viticulture?

The non-intentional trap some candidates stumbled into here, was to just see a general climate change question, and
as a result wrote a generic essay thatdid notaddress in detail the specific aspects of changing rainfall and wind
patterns. The weaker ones were quite descriptive without linking back to how the changing patterns affect
viticulture. Examples were lacking in many cases with not enough of a global peprsective.

The better papers were able to give examples of how rainfall and wind patterns were changing, seeing both negative
and potentially beneficial sides and supporting their analysis with the many possible global examples from recent
years. Timing of events, severity, and addressing impacts from flowering through to harvest as well as trellis and
equipment concerns proved the most thorough answers.

5) To what extent can rootstocks be used to mitigate the effects of climate change?

There is quite a lot to unpack in this question. First, candidates had to look at defining the effects of climate change
and then make specific connection with different rootstocks across these different scenarios, identifying how they
can help to mitigatethe often-unpredictable changes.

                                                                                                                                         4
Weaker papers often just focused on a descriptive list of rootstocks, their characteristics and sometimes a few
examples of what certain producers are using, but without looking at how they could mitigate the effects of climate
change. Others had an overlylimited view of climate change effects as just hotter and drier, ignoring aspects such as
frost, flood, changing pest and disease pressures, etc. It was also important to consider the "to what extent"
practicalities of changing a rootstock, the cost of nforuit while the vine establishes and the gamble on guessing what
the vineyard conditions will be like over the next 30 years.
The better papers had excellent examples from different scenarios, considered things like whether you need a
rootstock at all and looked at many practical implications.

                                                                                                                                         5
Paper Two Report: Paper Chair, Richard Kershaw MW

General comments

While candidates generally displayed sound technical knowledge, many responses remained superficial, resembling
diploma-level accounts rather than the critical analysis expected at Master of Wine level.

Notable strengths emerged among candidates who appeared to have practical winemaking experience and
performed exceptionally well in problem-solving scenarios. Questionfour achieved a high pass rate, despite limited
attempts, whilequestionone on bottle-fermented sparkling wine received many pas-slevel and several excellent
responses, demonstrating both technical accuracy and a broad understanding. Successful scripts consistently
defined key terms at the outset, planned essays systematically,nad used diverse international examples to support
arguments.

However, many candidates offered descriptive accounts rather than critical evaluation, producing "laundry lists" of
techniques without explaining mechanisms, or weighing trad-oeffs, or applying knowledge in context. Some
candidates appeared to be relying no memorisation instead of genuine understanding. Confusions between pH and
acidity, or bacteria and yeasts, further weakened technical credibility, with superficial statements such as "MLF
softens acidity" left unexplained. Poor essay technique compoundethdese issues--weak time management led to
verbose passages at the expense of concise analysis, while careless errors suggested rushed completion. More
disciplined planning, focused writing, and attention to accuracy are essential to demonstrate the analayltdicepth
expected at MW level.

Use of examples was also problematic. Candidates often ove-relied on local or obscure producers that failed to
illustrate arguments effectively, while omitting benchmark international cases that would have strengthened
authority. Name-dropping without explanation added little value.

Future success in paper two will depend on integrating knowledge with critical thinking. Candidates must move
beyond "how" to address "why," demonstrating understanding of both processes and their contextual applications.
Preparation should focus on evaluation, mechanism explanatio, nand disciplined essay planning.

1) Critically assess the key techniques a winemaker can use to enhance complexity and texture in bo-ftetrlemented
sparkling wines.

This question challenged candidates to demonstrate a thorough understanding of how winemakers intentionally
create complexity and texture in bottl-efermented sparkling wines, requiring an evaluation of chemical,
microbiological, and physical mechanisms thorughout the production process.

The strongest scripts followed clear chronological structures, beginning with base wine considerations, including
grape variety and harvest decisions, pressing regimes that distinguished between cuvée and taille fractions, and
must handling techniques suchas débourbage. These candidates effectively discussed fermentation choices,
particularly vessel type and yeast selection, examining how these elements impact flavour layering and mouthfeel.

They treated malolactic conversion as a stylistic tool rather than simply stating it as fact, consistently emphasising
the importance of blending and reserve wines as methods to create depth and consistency across different cuvées.
When discussing second fermentation, better candidates evaluated the effects of tirage composition, yeast selection,
and fermentation temperature on mousse quality and autolysis, effectively connecting extended lees ageing with the
release of mannoproteins, lipids, and amino acsidon texture and aromatic development. Dosage was evaluated with
nuance, recognising its role not only in balancing acidity but also in adding aromatic complexity through liqueur
composition and integration time.

                                                                                                                                         6
Most surprisingly, numerous candidates failed to mention mousse at a--lsl pecifically how fine bubbles soften
perceived acidity, create creamy mi-dpalate weight, and support length and persistence. This represents a
fundamental oversight in understanding thetextural qualities of bottl-efermented wines.

Several candidates overlooked crucial stages, such as base wine production, and focused disproportionately on oak
influence, reserve wines, or dosage. The regional scope proved limited in many responses, with answers relying too
heavily on Champagne exampel s, missing opportunities to demonstrate a global perspective through references to
Cava, Franciacorta, or traditional method wines from the New World.

Overall, candidates who excelled were those who moved beyond description to demonstrate a genuine
understanding of how specific techniques enhance the sensory attributes in question. Success required not only
knowledge of production methods but also the ailbity to critically evaluate their purpose and effect.

2) Evaluate the different winemaking techniques that can enhance a wine's potential for extended bottle ageing.

This question required candidates to critically examine how specific winemaking and maturation decisions influence
a wine's long-term stability and capacity to evolve positively in bottle.

Strong answers needed to demonstrate understanding of how key interventions affect structural balance: phenolic
extraction and management providing oxidative buffering in reds; protective handling or controlled oxidation
strategies in whites; the criticalrole of low pH (typically 3.4) for microbial stability, colour retention and SOefficacy;
oxygen management through vessel choice and maturation regimes; and the strategic use of techniques like lees
ageing, clarification, and blending.

Candidates were expected to illustrate these principles across diverse wine style--sfrom reductive, high-acid whites
to oxidatively handled fortified wines, traditional method sparkling wines with extended lees ageing, and sweet
wines where residual sugar and acidity balance support longevity. The question required technical explanations of
mechanisms, not merely a listing of practices.

With a higher-than-average pass rate, this effectively differentiated between those candidates with genuine technical
understanding and those attempting to list memorised information without critical evaluation.

Phenolic management was generally wel-lunderstood, particularly for red wines, with candidates discussing
extraction through cold soak, extended maceration, and cap management. For whites, both protective handling and
controlled hyper-oxidation approacheswere addressed effectively. The best answers explored oxygen strategies, the
benefits of lees ageing, the impacts of vessel selection, and strategic blending decisions using benchmark examples.
However, acidity and pH control were surprisingly poorly covered. Many candidates failed to connect low pH with
improved microbial stability, colour retention, and SOefficacy.

Classic high-acid, long-lived styles like German Riesling, Loire Chenin Blanc or Hunter Semillon were seldom
mentioned. Coverage of wine styles proved uneven, with many restricting themselves to red and white wines,
ignoring sparkling, sweet, or fortifiedcategories. This narrow focus severely limited their ability to demonstrate a
comprehensive understanding across different wine types.

Technical depth was often lacking, with essays providing lists without explaining the underlying mechanism--s
stating, for example, that "MLF can increase ageability" without explaining how. Hygiene and microbial stability
received minimal attention despitetheir fundamental importance. Examples frequently came from fringe regions
rather than established benchmarks, while references to supplementary techniques, such as antioxidants, chelating
agents, or closure implications, were rare.

                                                                                                                                         7
Overall, while the best essays were analytical, technically detailed, and stylistically informed, weaker responses
were descriptive, unstructured, and narrow in scope. Success required not just knowledge of practices but
understanding of their mechanisms and the ability to evaluate their application across diverse wine styles.

3) Examine the roles of bacteria in winemaking. How can bacteria be managed to achieve desired outcomes?

This question tested candidates' technical and practical understanding of bacteria's diverse roles in winemaking. A
solid answer needed to demonstrate knowledge of beneficial bacte--riaparticularly Oenococcus oeni's role in
malolactic fermentation--and spoilage organisms, including Lactobacillus, Pediococcus, Acetobacter, and
Gluconobacter.

Candidates were expected to explain specific metabolic pathways: how O. oeni converts malic to lactic acid, affecting
pH and wine stability; how Lactobacillus and Pediococcus produce biogenic amines and-oflfafvours; and how acetic
acid bacteria create voal tile acidity and ethyl acetate under aerobic conditions. Management strategies should have
included precise parameters--pH ranges of 3.2-3.5 for MLF, molecular SO below 0.5 mg/L, temperatures of 1-8
22°C--alongside practical approaches like inoculation timnig, oxygen exclusion and hygiene protocols. The question
demanded evaluation of how bacterial management varies with wine style, from encouraging MLF in most reds to
suppression in aromatic whites, with consideration of trad-oeffs between predictability adn terroir expression.
The most alarming issue was confusion between Brettanomyces (a type of yeast) and bacteria. While most
recognised O. oeni superficially, optimal conditions were poorly understood. Vague assertions such as: "MLF reduces
acidity", appeared without explainincgonversion chemistry. Understanding spoilage bacteria proved weake--st
volatile acidity, biogenic amines, mouse taint or ropiness were listed without explanation with most candidates
limiting discussion to clean fruit and cellar hygiene whilst critical detilas - oxygen exclusion through inert gas
blanketing, topped barrels, molecular SO maintenance based on pH, and recognition that these aerobic organisms
thrive with oxygen exposure and pH above 3.5­ were largely absent. In fact, the concept that pH below 3.2 inhibits
bacteria while above 3.5 increases spoilage was rarely clear. Critical oxygen exclusion details were absent.

Advanced techniques, such as lysozyme or alternative bacteria like Lactobacillus plantarum, or DMDC, were notably
missing.

The few candidates showing mastery covered the topic's breadth with accurate parameters while demonstrating
practical understanding through relevant example--s full MLF in Syrah, partial MLF in Chablis, suppression in
Riesling, higher VA acceptance in Port.They explained metabolic pathways, outlined comprehensive management
strategies, and critically assessed trade-offs.

4) Evaluate prevention and correction strategies for each of the following issues:
      a) 0.9g/L volatile acidity in a Chablis wine (pH 3.2, 12.5% ABV) intended for lees ageing;
      b) Strong reductive aromas pos-tmalolactic fermentation in a premium Barossa Shiraz (pH 3.8, 15% ABV)
           destined for 24-month oak ageing;
      c) 80mg/L total sulphur dioxide in a Bordeaux blend (pH 3.6, 13.5% ABV) p-rbeottling.

This three-part question assessed candidates' ability to critically evaluate both preventative and corrective
winemaking strategies for distinct compositional and sensory faults. While initially appearing highly technical, the
question proved to be more srtaightforward than expected, with specific guidance provided for the required
solutions. Only eight candidates attempted it, achieving a 50% pass rate.

For the Chablis scenario, the stronger candidates explained why 0.9 g/L volatile acidity was problematic, as it
exceeded the 0.7 g/L sensory threshold, thereby compromising Chablis's stylistic requirements for freshness and
precision. They recognised thatwhile legal limits often exceed 0.9 g/L, this level was inappropriate for the style,
noting the protective pH of 3.2, though acknowledging lees ageing risks exacerbating VA development without
microbial stability.

                                                                                                                                         8
Successful prevention strategies included using clean fruit to limit microbial loading, strict sanitation with oxygen
exclusion, maintaining yeast health through adequate nutrients and temperature control, and implementing
appropriate SO regimes at 25-30 mg/L free SO for a pH of 3.2. Correction proposals included blending with lo-wVA
Chablis, reverse osmosis despite flavour loss risks, curtailing lees ageing if instability persisted, and sterile filtration
for active spoilage organisms. However, some caniddates showed muddled reasoning, discussing producers without
VA issues when asked to address high VA, suggesting reliance on memorised examples rather than applied
technical knowledge.

For Shiraz, better answers linked high pH to reduced SO efficacy, reductive aromas to oxygen limitation and that at
elevated alcohol (15%), microbial stability may still be compromised, all of which can become persistent if not
addressed before extended oak ageing.

Strong prevention strategies included ensuring adequate YAN, using lo-wHS yeast strains, employing pump-overs
or open-top fermenters for aeration, discontinuing vineyard sulphur sprays pr-hearvest, and prompt pos-tMLF SO
addition. Correction approaches included aerative racking to volatiliseHS, copper fining with appropriate trials
while noting thiol risks, selecting permeable barrels for oxygen exposure, and potential blending. Many candidates
missed the Barossa context clue about ope-ntop fermenters of r reducing reduction. Weaker scripts confused
reduction with oxidation, offered vague solutions, or failed to recognise the importance of early intervention before
oak ageing entrenches faults.

The Bordeaux scenario was least well answered, revealing gaps in understanding regulatory frameworks and SO
correction strategies. Strong candidates identified that 180 mg/L exceeded the EU red wine limits (150 mg/L),
making it unsaleable in that market. Recognising that at pH 3.6, molecular SOis less active, it reduces protection,
while high totals limit further additions and suppress fruit expression.

Better prevention strategies included accurate molecular SO-based dosing, avoiding redundant applications
through monitoring, reducing microbial pressure via hygiene and oxygen exclusion, early acidification for improved
SO efficacy, and regular free/total SO tracking. Corrections included blending with low-SO components, hydrogen
peroxide where permitted with precise dosing, extended maturation for natural dissipation, or marketing in countries
with higher thresholds.

5) Considering a diversity of wine styles, critically evaluate the importance of blending to achieve consistency.

This question assessed candidates' understanding of blending as both a technical and strategic tool in winemaking.
Answers needed to define blending as the combination of wine components in creating a target profile and stylistic
consistency as the reproduction of sensory, structural, and quality attributes across bottlings or vintages. The critical
requirement was evaluating blending's importance to consistency, not merely listing practices.

Candidates were expected to demonstrate how blending operates at multiple stag--efsrom pre-fermentation, co-
fermentation through to pr-ebottling adjustments--across at least three wine styles. For sparkling wines, this meant
explaining how reserve wines maintain the non-vintage house style; for fortified wines, how solera systems ensure
absolute consistency; for still wines, how varietal or vessel blending achieves balance; and for sweet wines, how
blending different harvest passes or botrytis levels createsharmony. The question demanded critical evaluation of
trade-offs, recognising that blending is often more acute in hig-vholume commercial wines than premium single-
vineyard examples, and assessing when consistency might compromise terroir expression.

This was the most poorly answered question on the paper. Many candidates drifted into descriptive accounts without
critically evaluating the importance of blending to consistency.
The failure to define key terms suggested inadequate planning, leaving essays unfocused and rambling. Most
candidates specified which wine styles they would discuss, typically covering sparkling, still, and fortified wines, but
coverage proved uneven. Someomitted sparkling or fortified wine--s the categories where blending most obviously
ensures consistency. Many overlooked the solera system, arguably the most important blending mechanism for

                                                                                                                                         9
consistency, while blending's role in managing vintage variation in climatically variable regions like Champagne or
Bordeaux was underexplored.

Examples were sometimes superficial, with statements like "Moët uses 100+ base wines" appearing without
explaining why this matters for maintaining consistency across vintages or how reserve wines function as a stylistic
anchor. Mateus rosé was cited extesnively without substantive discussion of the commercial requirements for rosé
production. Only the best candidates discussed practical aspects, such as blending wines from different vessels,
using blending trials to correct imbalances in acidity or alcoho, lor the logistics of maintaining reserve wine stocks.
These candidates understood how blending supports specific stylistic goals, evaluating when it's essential versus
optional and recognising the commercial imperatives driving consistency in larg-escale production.

The lack of critical analysis was particularly disappointing. Most essays remained descriptive, failing to distinguish
between blending as a corrective tool versus a proactive stylistic choice. Candidates didn't evaluate how blending
balances commercial objectives against quality aspirations or assess the pressure between consistency and vintage
expression. Success required moving beyond memorised examples to demonstrate genuine understanding of
blending's strategic importance--not just what winemakers do, ubt why these practices matter for achieving
consistency and how they contribute to commercial viability while maintaining quality.

6) Assess how pH influences winemaking decisions at key stages from grape to finished wine.

This question tested candidates' ability to apply detailed chemical knowledge of pH across the winemaking process.
Strong answers needed to define pH as the logarithmic measure of hydrogen ion concentration, cite typical ranges
(2.9-3.1 for sparkling, 3.1-3.4 for whites, 3.3-3.8 for reds), and systematically evaluate how pH drives decisions at
each stage.

Candidates were expected to explain pH's influence on: microbial and oxidative stability during juice handling; yeast
health and competing organisms during fermentation; MLF facilitation or suppression; SOefficacy during
maturation; and pre-bottling adjustments including filtration requirements. The question required specific
parameters--not vague references to "high" or "low" p--Hwith examples illustrating how pH considerations vary
across different wine styles.

A large number of candidates, with varying degrees of success, answered this question. It revealed a clear divide
between those with genuine technical understanding, as evidenced by their comprehensive coverage of key stages,
and those who offered only sueprficial generalisations.

Strong candidates systematically covered key stages, explaining how pH affects decisions from whole bunch
pressing and early acidification during juice handling through to final SOcalculations pre-bottling. They
demonstrated how a lower pH supports clean fermentation by suppressing competing microbes, while a higher pH
reduces SO efficacy and complicates microbial management. During MLF, they recognised that higher pH
encourages LAB activity but reduces stability, with MLF itself raising pH furthe--r discussing both encouragement
strategies through inoculation and suppression through SO or lysozyme. The best answers addressed maturation
issues with spoilage organisms at elevated pH levels and recognised pre-bottling as the final opportunity for p-H
informed adjustments.

Significant omissions weakened many responses. Very few candidates considered the influence of pH on fining
efficacy or stability management. Colour stability received minimal attention despite pH's critical role in anthocyanin
stability. While cold stabilsation was covered by half the candidates, protein and tartrate stability relationships with
pH were frequently overlooked. Some candidates addressed only pH adjustment methods, missing the broader
question of how pH influences decisions throughout winemkiang. Others wasted time explaining differences between
total acidity and pH rather than addressing key winemaking stages.

                                                                                                                                        10
Technical depth varied dramatically. Weaker answers relied on statements like "pH affects microbial stability"
without explaining the mechanism--that lower pH increases the proportion of molecular SO, the antimicrobial form.
A surprising number focused solely on regional examples, presumably from their home markets, suggesting a
limited global perspective that is insufficient at MW level.
The question effectively differentiated candidates who understood pH as a fundamental driver of winemaking
decisions from those reciting memorised facts without comprehension. Success required explaining not just what
happens at different pH levels but howthis knowledge actively informs choices throughout the winemaking process.

                                                                                                                                        11
Paper Three Report: Paper Chair, Caroline Gilby MW

General comments

Paper three is about facts and there is no getting away from the need for real world experience of the details of wine
handling ­ so visits to bottling lines and labs are essential. This is not easy information to glean from textbooks but
represents a critical stage in getting wine to the consumer in good and legal condition, properly packaged for its
intended shelf life. The questions are designed to test candidates' ability to apply their knowledge and not just repeat
facts that have been committed to memory.

Some precision in terms of use of numbers and exac(trather than vague) technical terms are required. For instance,
actual levels in the correct units for additives and processing aids, not simply "sufficient SO2". Sloppy shorthand
terms like "sulphur" should be avoided when candidates actually mean SO2 or sulphites, and cainddates also need
to be clear if they are talking about free or total SO2. It is also useful to know about legal limits in key markets such
as EU, as well as typical usage. Proof readingof technical terms and wine words is suggested.

It is useful for candidates to physically visit wineries, and to spend time behind the scenes asking questions at the
bottling line and in the QC/QA department, especially around problems that may arise and what the winemaker or
quality control manager would do to address a range of situations. This will also provide examples to be used to
support reasoning.

As ever, candidates do need to read the questions carefully and answer what has been asked. In some cases,
candidates missed the second part of the question and therefore could not gain good marks. Many answers that do
not meet required standards are pureyl descriptive and fail to apply knowledge in the context of the question. It's
important that candidates can explain relevant points but also tie these into discussion and analysis, supported by
examples that support the point being made, and that offer mreothan X does Y.

1) As a producer of a dry white wine that may age in bottle for up to five years, you are considering changing from
natural cork stoppers to an alternative closure. What technical factors should you consider?

There was a solid pass rate on thisquestionindicating that closures are well understood. Candidates needed to
understand that the closure must provide an effective sea-lfor at least 5 years, in this case-and could have taken
the view that an inert closure to reduce change was preferred, or a csluore that allowed some bottle development.
The question did not require answers to cover marketing or end user preferences. Technical considerations include:
suitability of closure to avoid taints or detrimentaclhanges and avoid leaks; handling and fitting; effective life span;
and implications for handling of the wine itself, including managing headspace.

Examiners reported a good number of hig-hquality scripts. Where candidates did not do well, they were let down by
poor understanding of technical details such as OTR (correct units showing amount/per volume/per unit of time
must be given, or numbers are meaningless) and failed to cover the larger picture of wine handling and headspace
management. Descriptive answers without real analysis were also disappointing. And examples needed to be more
than X does Y and give enough detail that the context is clear.

                                                                                                                                        12
2) Write concise notes on three of the following:
    a) Mousiness
    b) Light strike in bottled wine
    c) Elevated volatile acidity in bottled wine
    d) Management of a tank of rosé with free sulphur dioxide well above its ideal level.

This question required candidates to have a strong understanding of 3 of the 4 topics. It was also specific that the
answer needed to be concise. Therefore, if the candidate had strong knowledge on 3 of the topics, then the paper
itself was not that diffiuc lt. Those lacking in knowledge were shown up very quickly and often candidates tended to
write around the subject rather than answer the question asked. The topics mousiness and lig-shttrike were
probably the two best answered questions, although a numbeorf candidates were not aware of implications of
riboflavin levels and sulphur-containing amino acids. The answer on volatile acidity was probably the most varie­d
some excellent answers but weak answers failed to address `in a bottled wine'. If they werootn VA in general, they
missed the key aspect of the QC investigation to establish how VA arose in bottled wine and could usefully have
referred to how to prevent its future occurrenceT.herefore, reading the question and answering accordingly was key
here rather than just writing about volatile acidity. The question of managing high FSO2 in a rosé was probably the
weakest in terms of answers, showing that many candidates just do not have a strong grasp of winemaking
practices outside of the standard procseses implemented by winemakers. Those that provided relevant examples to
support their explanations scored well, often helping those into a pass versus those that fell short.
3) What are the key factors to consider when deciding whether to cold stabilise white and red wines? What quality
control measures are required to test that wine is stable?

This question had the lowest pass mark on this paper. Several candidates interpreted the second part of this
question as covering quality control measures generally addressing wine stability, not just measures for testing for
cold stability, as was expected in setting the question. This was allowed for. However, candidates who did not
address the second part of the question did lose marks. Candidates should be aware that cold stabilisation is an
important winemaking process that helps prevent unwanted cryastllisation in wine, particularly tartrate crystals,
when the wine is stored at low temperatures. It is not simply about chill filtering the wine. However, winemakers
must carefully consider various factors when deciding whether or not to cold stabilise ainwe, as it involves trade-
offs between quality, cost, and desired characteristics. Many candidates did not explain why tartrate stabilisation is
less important for red than for white or rosé wine.

Weaker answers were descriptive about methods for cold stabilising often with strong emphasis on chill filtering,
rather than providing sufficient analysis about why it might be done and the tra-doeffs and implications for wine
quality of the methods avaialble. A lot of answers did not address the second part of the question about tests for
tartrate stability, and this was important to cover for good marks. Better answers looked at wine chemistry rather
than just focusing on practical or economic factors,ubt several who did attempt to do this were unable to explain it
properly. It looks as though candidates had been told something by a producer but struggled to justify it in their
essays. Overall, the first part of the question (factors to consider in decinidg whether to cold stabilise) was answered
much better than the second (QC measures relevant to tartrate stability), but many candidates appeared not to have
real breadth or depth of understanding on either aspect. With some notable exceptions, candidactoenstinue to
misunderstand the purpose of examples and thus how to use them in their answers: for example, a bald statement
that '[Supermarket X] requires [Winery Y] to cold stabilise its wines' is of limited value as an examp­leit needs to
cover why ( e.g. transport in cold temperatures, likely customer responses etc).

                                                                                                                                        13
4) Why are fining agents used in winemaking? For each of the following wines, explain which factors might
influence the choice of fining agent used:

    a) entry-level South African Chenin Blanc
    b) DOCG Barolo, and
    c) vegan AOC Côtes de Provence rosé.
This was, in general, a better answered question than the one on cold stability. The question was broken into two
parts and both required addressing, which a number of candidates failed to do. Answers needed to be clear that the
purposes of fining are clarification and stabilisation, and that it may also be used to modify colour and adjust
astringency/ tannin levels. It is also important to be aware that it is speedier than a natural settling process, so
saves money for producer and ultimately, consumer, adnmay have logistical benefits.
Most candidates had a reasonable grasp of the issues relating to fining, with two common exceptions: (i) cost of the
fining agent chosen and cost implications of the time fining would take with each option; and (ii) labelling/allergen
considerations- though not essential to cover, it would have been useful to show awareness. Many candidates were
unable to use relevant producer examples to discuss critically alternative fining practices, suggesting that they need
to travel/speak to visiting winemakers morethan they have done to date. A number of candidates also wasted time
addressing pre-fermentation fining choices, whereas they should be aware thpataper three addresses only the post-
fermentation stage of winemaking unless otherwise stated.
Where many came unstuck was their basic winemaking knowledge of factors influencing the choice of fining agent
and which fining agent is most applicable to the wine style in question. Those that could do this, scored well. The
answer to the DOCG Barolo wasthe best answered part of the question, perhaps because it is a more traditional
wine style with which everyone is familiar. Those that provided relevant examples to support their explanation
scored well. Most candidates supported their answer with examepsl but often the examples were not well thought
through and showed little association with the points they should have been supporting.

                                                                                                                                        14
Paper Four Report: Paper Chair, James Davis MW

General comments

Overall, it was pleasing to see an improvement in the pass rate from 2024 to 2025. However, it was clear that many
essays were borderline rather than compelling passes. For paperfour, writing style and language are especially
important as candidates are encouraged to foster a fa-cbtased argument that can be drawn from knowledge of
different markets for wine around the world. Examiners noted weak English, slangy intros, or odd phrasiinngsome
instances. Similarly, candidates should make sure their essays have relevance and focus. Often essays were
surface-level, lacking critical thinking or industry insight. I would encourage students to directly address the
question set with a clear argument and language. Try to avoid slang and ensure that any acronyms youuse are
explained, and globally relevant rather than countr-yspecific, as they are otherwise unlikely to be understood.
Ensure you have data points and examples to back up your narrative. We are not seeking perfection, but we are
looking for sufficient evidence of mastery to warrant a passing grade.

1) How has Champagne maintained its primacy in the world of sparkling wine?

This was a broad question that invited candidates to consider legal, historical, financial and economic reasons that
help explain the continued success of Champagne. Overall, it was answered quite poorly. Those essays that
succeeded covered the importantorle of the CIVC in organising the industry along with the importance of branding
allied to Champagne's luxury positioning. The role of branding could have been linked and discussed in relation to
the importance of distribution points across different salecshannels (on-trade, of-ftrade, and export). More could
have been written about the role of competition, critically examining how Champagne has arguably succeeded and
seen off a strong threat from Prosecco. Weaker essays were descriptive or anecdotal anladcked critical thinking.
Examiners would like to have seen more data relating to pricing (cost per bottle and grape pricing as well as retail
and promotional price architecture), along with data on how yield limits can be used to help manage supply and
quality.

2) Do sustainability initiatives inevitably compromise profitability?

Many candidates struggled with this essay due to a lack of incisive structure and narrow focus, often concentrating
solely on vineyard production while neglecting broader commercial and global considerations. Stronger essays
stood out by presenting balanced arguments - such as weighing upfront costs against long-term gains - and by
incorporating diverse, wel-lchosen examples from various countries and models, including bulk shipping, glass
weight, labour costs, and accreditation schemes like Ecocert. Hig-shcoring responses also demonstrated a nuanced
understanding of sustainability's commercial impact across the value chain, acknowledging the complexity of ROI
modelling and profitability implications for different stakeholders. Importantly, these essays lwedith clear
arguments supported by examples, rather than relying on examples to drive the narrative. Candidates who critically
evaluated source material, rather than accepting producer claims at face value, and who considered consumer
willingness to pay, along with the role of government support, offered a more lateral and insightful perspective. In
contrast, weaker essays were often overly US- or Scandinavia-centric, relied heavily on micro-level sustainability
practices, and lacked the macro-level analysis of who benefits and why.

3) How can the wine industry best address the issues of overproduction and falling consumption?

This question was generally well answered, with stronger responses demonstrating a clear, logical structure, global
scope, and analytical depth. Candidates who excelled showed an ability to assess both mature and emerging
markets across New and Old World er gions, incorporating producer and consumer perspectives to offer a
comprehensive view. Successful essays addressed key themes such as profitability, lon-gterm viability, vine-pull
schemes, market segmentation, and generational shifts in consumption, usinthgese to explore systemic supply and
demand dynamics. Rather than relying on binary solutions like reducing overproduction or increasing consumption,

                                                                                                                                        15
top-performing candidates questioned the interdependence of these issues and supported their arguments with
relevant data, such as OIV statistics. While some relied on anecdotal claims or descriptive marketing examples,
stronger responses maintained a critical lens and cohesive narrative. Importantly, in the better essays balanced
arguments were favoured over ideological or polarising views- particularly regarding health-related consumption
trends.

4) To what extent can government wine monopolies benefit producers, retailers and consumers?

This was a reasonably well-answered, if unpopular, question. Pas-slevel essays showed solid knowledge of key
issues, including pricing mechanisms, sustainability and public health, the tender process, monopoly dynamics and
distribution and logistics. It was good to see some essays refer to the role of quality assurance that a monopoly
structure can indirectly (or directly) offer a producer. Those essays that were strongest focused critical analysis on
the producer and retailer implications of monopoly antdhe question of consumer choice and quality, along with the
balance between restriction and efficiency. Weaker essays tended to focus on one side of the argument with more
superficial analysis or insufficient depth, for example, the variation in monopoltyrusctures across jurisdictions.
Often, there was an ove-rreliance on Canada and Scandinavia as example markets, and the examiners noted that US
control states were frequently omitted or underexplored. The best essays were well structured, nuanced, and
grounded in definition and evidence, addressing, for example, the debate over whether monopolies help or hinder
small/niche producers.

5) Wineries are increasingly selling direct to consumers. Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this approach
compared to other routes to market.

This was the most popular essay on the paper and there were many good answers. Examiners noted that strong
essays demonstrated a solid understanding of the benefits of direct to consumer (DTC), including control over the
customer experience, higher margins, brand building, and the role of data capture (loyalty schemes such as Wine
Clubs). These benefits were then assessed in the context of market structure, consumer trends, and the strategic
implications of DTC models. Strong essays showed frequent use oferal-world examples, showing awareness of
different producer scales and geographic markets, including, for example, references to the nascent English wine
industry and the associated development of DTC. The best responses acknowledged the complexity of hiydbRroutes
to Market R( TM)s and recognised that DTC is not a one-size-fits-all model, discussing DTC in the context of a broader,
multi-channel strategy. However, many essays lacked adequate discussion of alternative RTMs, such as traditional
wholesale and e-commerce partnerships.Also lacking in many essays was consideration of the high costs of running
DTC and the upfront capital investment often required. Generally, there was a heavy US and Canada bias, with
Europe and other global markets underrepresented. Examiners also notedhat t there was little comparative analysis
of how DTC plays out in rural compared to urban locations. The best essays defined DTC clearly and placed it within
the wider RTM context, treating DTC as one of several options, not an isolated strategy.

6) Discuss the evolution of the négociant business format in Burgundy over the last 15 years, explaining the
contributing factors. Are current conditions financially sustainable?

This question, which required specific knowledge of the Burgundy market, was not at all popular, but those who
attempted it answered reasonably well. Some candidates demonstrated confusion about the role and scope of
négociants, often misrepresenting themas merely brokers, or confusing them with wine domaines, and sometimes
incorrectly stating that négociants began as recently as the 1980s. Some candidates only referred to new
négociants, not thinking of historically successful examples such as Drouhin oBrichot. Examples used were
sometimes inappropriate, such as using Domaine cases in what is a négocian-ftocused question. Several essays
were incomplete or very brief, limiting depth of analysis. While introductions were generally strong, with good
parameter setting and relevant examples, candidates often showed gaps in knowledge, for example believing all
growers make their own wine or that négociants are declining in number. Stronger candidates included thoughtful
writing, clear structure, and attentionotrecent financial aspects. Overall, greater focus on the full scope of the

                                                                                                                                        16
négociant business, with more detailed technical and historical accuracy, would have enhanced the quality of
responses.

                                                                                                                                        17
Paper Five Report: Paper Chair, Ken MacKay MW

General comments

Many candidates seemed better prepared for this year's papefirve, compared to last year. There was a relatively
balanced spread of answers across the five questions, although questiotnwowas the runaway favourite. As always,
the strongest candidates were those who combined clear structure, directness in answering the question, a global
perspective, relevant and varied examples, and critical analysis.

Across all questions, weaker essays tended to be overly descriptive, lack good examples, or focused on just one
aspect of the question rather than answering all parts evenly. Questioonne, in particular, showed that even we-ll
prepared candidates can struggle if they don't allocate time or analysis evenly to all parts of the question. Many
candidates also failed to define key terms at the outset, which led to a lack of focus and confusiunngc, onvincing
arguments which didn't link well to their conclusions. nAother recurring weakness was a narrow geographical lens,
with examples clustered in the UK, USA and EU; candidates are reminded thaptaper five always requires a global
view and appropriate diversity of examples.

Often, answers revealed a tendency to overstate certain solutions (notably No/Lo wines in Q2) without bothering to
interrogate their limitations or feasibility. Common technical missteps included misquoting or misrepresenting
sources (for example, Dr LauraCatena's views on health and wine), simple factual inaccuracies in product details
(such as the alcohol content of Moscato d'Asti) or producer name spellings, and confusion between related but
distinct concepts (for instance, conflating complex moderati-oonriented drinking trends with permanent abstention).
Opportunities for deeper critical engagemen--t such as exploring trade-offs, unintended consequences, or tensions
between goals (e.g. sustainability versus cost, technology innovation versus displacedabl our) --were frequently
missed.

The very best candidates stood out for their ability to define and frame the key terms of the question, integrate a
genuinely global set of examples, address both breadth and depth, and demonstrate a capacity to challenge
assumptions and present a nuanced,balanced argument, which directly answered the question.

1) What will be the likely impact on the global wine industry if health warnings about cancer risks become
increasingly mandatory on wine labels? Discuss the implications for producers, marketers and consumers.

This is a `hot topic' and it was clear that many candidates had researched it well in advance of the exam. However,
many answers --even those with good, general background knowledg--e failed to fully address all parts of the
question, or were too descripvtie and simplistic about the issue. Often, candidates spent too much time outlining the
background with unnecessary detail before getting around to delivering substantive discussion on the implications
for producers, marketers and consumers. Dr Laura Caten'as position on this issue was very frequently
misrepresented. Consumers were rarely treated with any global or demographic resolution. Another common
weakness was the lack of supporting evidence and examples--or examples concentrated solely on the UK, USAor
EU. A global perspective is essential to a high-quality paper five response, and candidates must ensure they reflect
the global nature of the industry. Many other weaker answers had an overly narrow focus entirely on label changes
and costs, rather than on wider implications such as the impact on sales and global ove-srupply, the potential
opportunity for premiumisation, or the pressure to reduce alcohol levels.

A further shortcoming in many scripts was a lack of engagement with the wider commercial and regulatory context.
Few candidates explored how mandatory health warnings could affect market positioning, brand equity, consumer
trust, or long-term category growth, beyond the immediate packaging implications. Opportunities to discuss
potential shifts in consumer perception, changes in o-nand off-trade behaviour, and the possible reallocation of
marketing spend were often missed. Similarly, there was limited disucssion of how producers in different market
segments --from bulk exporters to fine wine estates--might face very different challenges and opportunities.

                                                                                                                                        18
Pass -level candidates avoided most of these pitfalls and applied their knowledge evenly across the three areas
mentioned in the question, supported by global examples. Stronger candidates considered the issue in greater depth
and breadth, presenting more balanced arguments, better supported by more diverse examples from different
regions, and engaged with current health discourse in a nuanced way. They also considered potential benefits to all
three groups --demonstrating an ability to think holistically adncritically about the situation.

2) How is the global wine industry adapting to changing societal attitudes towards alcohol consumption, and how
should it respond to the challenges and opportunities these changes present?

This was the most attempted question this year. Most candidates demonstrated a good grasp of the broad societal
trends affecting alcohol consumption, and many had clearly prepared well. However, marks clustered below and
around the pass mark, with relatively few excellent performances. A handful of candidates delivered outstanding
answers combining up-to-date data, wel-lstructured analysis and genuinely original perspectives.

Weaker responses tended to be descriptive, repetitive or overly focused on one area (e.g. product innovation), with
limited attention to a broader strategic response or regulatory implications. No/Lo "wines" were often uncritically
embraced as a panacea wtihout any real interrogation of their limitations, with some candidates devoting too much
of their answer to these products. Many neglected to discuss developing markets or failed to give sufficient global
examples.

A further limitation in many papers was the lack of engagement with the complexity of the category's challenges and
opportunities. Few candidates explored alternative strategic responses beyond product reformulati--onsuch as
changes in marketing, distribution, portfolio management, or consumer engagement. There was little examination of
how different segments of the supply chain (from small estate producers to multinational brand owners) might
experience and respond to societal shifts in consumption diffeenrtly, or how policy interventions and healt-hauthority
messaging could shape long-term demand. Equally, realistic tensions between goal--s for example, between
energy-intensive alcohol removal processes and sustainability targets--were rarely mentioned.

Stronger answers tackled both parts of the question clearly, defined key terms and showed a comprehensive
understanding of the varied impacts across the wine supply chain. The best candidates demonstrated genuine
critical thinking--particularly in interrogating the limitations of the No/Lo category (including the facts that even the
most bullish current growth projections would not offset the overall decline in the wine market, and the persistent
lack of real success in producing red wines in this category, which excludes a whole swathe of consumers). These
candidates examined the role of global health authorities, and recognised the aforementioned tension between
alcohol reduction and sustainability objectives. Better papers moved beyond health consideorantsi alone, linking
declining consumption among younger demographics to the evidence regarding, for example, increased c-osf-t
living worries and shifting social patterns, leading to changes in how leisure time is spent and a trend towards lower
amounts ofin-person social interaction.

3) You are tasked with creating a wine blend that represents the essence of humanity's wine culture. Which grapes
or regions would you include, and which winemaking style and packaging would you use, and why?

This creative and open-ended question really allowed candidates to demonstrate lots of personal insights and
originality. Many engaged very enthusiastically with the task and the pass rate was the strongest overall. There
were several outstanding papers. On the other hand, quite a number of answers failed to answer the specific
question asked, getting lost in a rabbit hole of thought. Successful answers began with a clear definition, and then
maintained a consistent rationale on how this would be deliveretdhrough their proposed blend, winemaking and
packaging decisions.

Weaker answers lacked any clear definition of what 'the essence of humanity's wine culture' meant, omitted a clear
blend proposal, or defaulted to historical surveys of grape varieties which had very limited relevance to answering
the question. Some essayswere conceptually rich in ideas but technically thin, or vice vers-atechnically complex,

                                                                                                                                        19
but lacking creativity or any detailed unpicking of cultural considerations. Packaging was an area where marks were
frequently lost--many candidates overlooked this entirely or discussed only glass bottles, or only bottles and
closures. Higher-scoring answers integrated specific thoughts on label design, sustainability impacts, messaging
and cultural cues.

Missed opportunities included integrating a truly global perspectiv--e many blends defaulted to wel-lknown
European classics --and considering how cultural symbolism, accessibility, and inclusivity could be expressed
through winemaking and packaging choices. Few candidates explored the potential tensions between authenticity
and innovation, or between cultural heritage and commercial popularity. Packaging was rarely treated as a tool for
storytelling or education, even though this could have been central etoxpressing `humanity's wine culture.'
The best answers began with a clear and compelling definition, then carried this through consistently in their choice
of grapes, regions, winemaking approach, and packaging. These candidates justified each element of their plan with
cultural, historical, and technical reasoning, and often incorporated sustainability, accessibility, and global appeal
into their concepts. The strongest essays presented a thoughtful, cohesive narrative that linked every decision back
to the core definition they had set out,ecarting a persuasive and memorable proposal with a global view that very
directly answered the question.

4) Analyse the major ethical concerns in the production of wine.

This timely and relevant question attracted a good number of articulate answers, and many candidates
demonstrated awareness of headline issues such as labour rights, environmental sustainability, and agrochemical
use. Some high-quality essays engaged deeply with these topics, offering original examples and reflecting on the
complexity of making ethical choices in a commercial context.

Weaker responses, however, often lacked a clear definition of `ethical concerns' or failed to clarify what they meant
by `production of wine.' Many candidates lacked the confidence to answer the question directly and to argue
convincingly which were the `major' concerns, preferring instead to describe a selection of issues, without assessing
their relative importance or exploring the dilemmas they pose. Common omissions included the tra-odfefs between
competing priorities (e.g. sustainability vs. cost, mecahnisation vs. employment), the influence of consumer
perceptions and greenwashing, and the role of transparency and certification schemes. A few candidates drifted into
discussions of health and marketing without clearly linking those issues to productiown,hich diluted their focus.
Missed opportunities included examining how ethical challenges vary between different scales and models of
production, or between regions with different employment/labour laws, environmental regulations, and cultural
expectations. Few candidates addressedthe role of technology in both solving and creating ethical problems, such
as the adoption of automation to reduce chemical exposure, but at the cost of jobs. Similarly, systemic inequalities in
land ownership, supply chain power, and access to sustainabitily resources were rarely explored.

The strongest answers defined `ethics' within the context of production and prioritised the most pressing concerns
based on their potential scale of impact and urgency. They drew on w-eclhl osen, up-to-date examples from different
regions and scales of production, and explored the dilemmas and unintended consequences of various solutions.
These candidates demonstrated that they could think beyond headlines, showing a nuanced understanding of how
ethics operate in the rea-lworld wine industry.

                                                                                                                                        20
5) To what extent does wine's cultural heritage remain relevant to younger consumers around the globe?
This was the least attempted question on the paper and had the lowest pass rate. Many of those who attempted it
appeared unprepared for the topic and struggled to define key terms such as `wine's cultural heritage' or to explain
what this might mean to `younger consumers' around the globe today.
Weaker answers frequently took the form of lengthy descriptions of wine heritage with little or no analysis of its
relevance to younger audiences. Others clumsily treated `younger consumers' as a single, homogeneous group,
ignoring variations in socio-economic background, culture, values, and engagement level--s making unconvincing
sweeping conclusions and assertions. Many responses were overly Eurocentric or North American in focus, with few
examples drawn from emerging markets or diverse cultural context.sSome essays avoided directly addressing the
`to what extent' part of the question, offering no clear conclusion.
Missed opportunities included analysing how younger consumers discover, engage with, and value heritage in other
cultural sectors (such as food, music, or fashion), and drawing parallels to wine. Few candidates examined how
heritage can be reframed to align with values such as sustainability, inclusivity, and novelty, or considered how
different marketing and communication channels might bridge the gap between tradition and contemporary
lifestyles. The competitive set--including alternative drinks categorei s --was also rarely addressed.
The strongest answers started by analysing the needs, interests, and motivations of younger consumer segments
globally (exploring some of the segmentation and contradictions), then built on this to assess how aspects of wine's
cultural heritage remained relevant and aligned with, or conflicted with, these. The best candidates provided a
balanced view, identifying both enduring points of connection and areas where adaptation or reinterpretation are
needed. Their examples were global, specific, and current,nad their conclusions were wel-lsupported by evidence
and critical reasoning.

                                                                                                                                        21
