MW Paper 1 - TORONTO April 10 2026.     Notes by MATTHEW STUBBS MW 
QUESTION 1 
a)Chardonnay 
The combination of aromas and ﬂavours from green fruit Wine 1, lemon Wine 3, peach Wine 4 and 
pineapple Wine 2 point to a variety than can grow in the full range of climates from cool to warm 
and immediately points to Chardonnay.
The use of winemaking techniques from a high level of buttery notes from malolactic fermentation 
in Wines 2 and 4, the bread-dough and pastry notes from lees ageing quite prevalent in Wines 1,3 
and 4 are all consistent with Chardonnay.
The varying use of oak from quite subtle French oak in Wine 3, to more overt coconut from 
American oak in Wine 2, touch of vanilla from old French oak in Wine 1 and more exuberant, ﬁne 
high toast in Wine 4 consisted with a proportion of New French barriques are all consistent too 
with Chardonnay.
The acidity levels vary from high in Wines 1 and 4 to quite high in Wine 3 to more moderate in 
Wine 2 again consistent with the diﬀerent cool to warm climates of Chardonnay. The alcohol 
levels too range from 13% Wines 1&4, to 13.5% Wines 2&3 all again in line with Chardonnay.
Finally, the range of qualities from good quality, Wines 2&3 to very good in Wines 1 and 4 are all 
consistent with the range of quality levels Chardonnay can achieve.
Wine 1 
b) Chablis 1er Cru 
The subtle aromas of green fruit and crisp lemon point to a cool climate origin such as Chablis. 
The very high, racy acidity and 13% alcohol are consistent with this cool climate as are the quite 
pronounced notes of gunﬂint, all synonymous with Chablis. The underlying creamy texture is in 
line with the extended lees ageing often seen with this origin as is the very subtle oak usage to 
allow the wet stone terroir to shine through. Finally the quite long, chalky ﬁnish is in line with a 1er 
Cru origin. It does not have the depth and length and intense chalky minerality of a Grand Cru 
site.
c) Very good quality, 1er Cru 
The quite concentrated mouthfeel and quite high level of pure citrus and green fruit intensity 
indicates a very good quality wine, a level up from Village and more in line with 1er Cru. The 
complex notes of subtle toast, sourdough notes from lees ageing and the quite pronounced 
mineral and oyster-shell terroir on the ﬁnish all point to a more terroir focussed wine and a 1er Cru 
level Chablis. The wine shows very good balance between the high, racy acidity, 13% alcohol and 
the quite pure citrus fruit notes. The ﬁnish too is quite long. It does not have the intensity, depth of 
a Grand Cru example but still is very good.
The pale lemon colour and almost predominantly primary notes suggests a young wine of 2-3 
years old. There is enough weight for the wine to improve and develop tertiary characters of dried 
fruit and almond over the next 3-4 years. It then has enough concentration and high acidity to 
keep a further 5-6 years beyond this.
Wine 2 
b) South Africa, Western Cape 
The pale golden colour and pronounced notes of mango and pineapple immediately point to a 
warm New World location and suggest California or South Africa in particular. The quite rich, 
rounded mouthfeel, 13.5% alcohol and moderate yet refreshing acidity could be consistent with 
warm regions in both yet the more vanilla rather than coconut aromas from French rather than 
American oak ageing point more to South Africa over California. The wine lacks the higher level of 
acidity and more well-deﬁned fruit ﬂavours of a premium region such as Walker Bay or 
Stellenbosch and the fruit characters seem simpler, more in line with a larger generic origin such 
as Western Cape. There is a hint of buttery complexity from malolactic fermentation and some 
subtle toast characters from old oak ageing all in line with a generic style from Western Cape.,

c) Good quality, equivalent to Village Cote Chalonnaise 
The wine shows some complexity of butter and toast notes from malolactic and ageing in used 
French oak. There is a reasonable level of mid-palate concentration and the ﬁnish, too, is medium. 
The fruit is a very tropical and a little one-dimensional in nature but the ﬁnish too is medium all 
suggesting a good quality wine. It is clearly a level up from the basic entry level style and the quite 
refreshing acidity points to some coastal inﬂuence as part of the blend. It lacks the precision of an 
equivalent Cote d’Or Village wine but would be equivalent to a Cote Chalonnaise in quality.
The pale golden colour and very primary tropical fruit indicate a wine of 2-3 years old. The fruit is 
very straightforward and more designed for immediate drinking than ageing which suggests that it 
will not improve further from here. However there is enough weight and complexity from oak to 
indicate the wine will keep at least another 2 - 3 years before fading, all backed up with the 
medium, fresh acidity.
Wine 3 
b) Casablanca, Chile 
The combination lemon, peach and quite high lively acidity immediately suggest a cool climate 
Old World location. However, there is a pure core of ripe, citrus and stone fruit, 13.5% alcohol and 
a riper mouthfeel without any savoury notes which points to a New World location and Chile in 
particular. The subtle vanilla from French oak fermentation and ageing and quite yeasty  
undertone point to a higher quality wine from a premium location and suggest Casablanca or 
Limari as most likely. Limari would show a little more leanness and a chalkier style from the 
limestone soils. The wine shows a little more mid palate opulence of the slightly longer hang time 
yet still cool, coastal fog-inﬂuenced location of Casablanca.
c)  Good quality, Reserva level
The quite subtle nose of lemon and peach gives way to a richer and more opulent palate which 
shows a reasonable level of fruit concentration. The ﬂavours are quite well deﬁned and there is 
complexity too from the integrated toast notes from subtle oak ageing and fermentation and the 
ﬁnish is medium. There is a good balance also between the quite high acidity and 12.5% alcohol 
and it all points to a good quality, Reserva level.
The pale lemon colour and very primary citrus and stone fruit notes point to a youthful wine of 
around 2-3 years old. There is not really enough mid palate intensity for the wine to improve from 
here, however there is enough weight supported by the subtle oak and quite high acidity to allow 
the wine to keep at least another 2-3 years before decline.
Wine 4 
b) Yarra Valley, Australia 
The quite pronounced nose of lemon, peach and ﬁne toast from New French oak could 
immediately point to Meursault or Puligny-Montrachet. The 13% alcohol and quite high and lively 
acidity could also be consistent with these origins as could the very good quality. The fruit, 
though, has an extra level of ripeness from Burgundy, with more Meyer lemon and some subtle 
tropical notes pointing to a slightly warmer New World location and suggesting Australia or New 
Zealand in particular. The wine shows a ﬂinty and reductive undertone which could be consistent 
with both these locations and the acidity is not quite high enough for the slightly cooler Auckland 
or Central Otago and there is a savoury note from possible natural yeast fermentation suggesting 
Australia and Yarra Valley in particular. Margaret River was also considered but the body would 
show more breadth and depth and slightly lower acidity, leaving the cooler climate Yarra Valley as 
most likely.
c) Very good quality, equivalent to Village Level Puligny-Montrachet 
The wine shows a pure citrus and stone fruit concentration. There is complexity from a very wide 
range of ﬂavours from lemon to mango and a diverse range of winemaking techniques, subtle 
cream and sourdough from partial malolactic and extended lees ageing. The ﬁne toast and very 
integrated vanilla and peach nature indicates a portion of new French oak, likely 20%, for both 
fermentation and ageing. The ﬁnish too is quite long and persistent, testament to the very good 
quality. It all points to a very good example, one equivalent to a very good Village Level Puligny 
Montrachet.
The lemon colour and notes of citrus, peach and oak with no tertiary dried fruit characters 
indicate a very youthful wine of 1-2 years old. The wine is taut and tightly wound and has enough 
concentration to improve over the next 3-4 years when the new French oak will integrate fully and 
the fruit will open out. It will then hold for another 4-5 years supported by the elevated acidity 
before decline.
QUESTION 2 
Wine 5 
a)Soave Classico, Veneto 
The subtle ﬂoral nose of elderﬂower and jasmine with notes of pear and quince could suggest a 
number of varieties including Pinot Grigio, Cortese or Garganega . The acidity is high and racy in 
line with all three as is the modest alcohol at 12%. However there is a noticeable camomile and 
almond ﬁnish in line with the more herbal and nutty proﬁle of Garganega and conﬁrms this as the 
variety.
The unique variety points to Soave as the location and the structure of high acidity, 12% alcohol 
and ﬂoral and citrus characters are in line with this northerly and quite cool climate. However there 
is some complexity from wet stone, smokiness as well as some creamy texture from lees ageing 
which elevates it to a more premium location and suggests the more volcanic soils of Soave 
Classico.
b) A complex, dry, creamy textured, volcanic and unoaked style of wine. One that is intended for 
immediate drinking but will reward keeping in the short term.
A good quality Soave Classico, as seen by the moderate pure citrus fruit concentration with quite 
precise and direct citrus fruit some  ﬂavours. There is complexity from the creamy texture and the 
wet stone, volcanic notes. It shows very good balance between the high, crisp acidity, 12% 
alcohol and moderate fruit intensity. The ﬁnish too is medium all suggesting a good quality, 
Classico example.
A creamy textured and slightly mineral, Classico style which indicates good rather than 
acceptable quality wine wine retailing for around $25 per bottle. The slightly higher price point 
means it will be above the inexpensive and more one-dimensional entry level styles of Soave and 
therefore available in more limited distribution. It will appeal to those consumers who love crisp, 
dry,  unoaked wines but in this case with some personality and mineral complexity. It could 
therefore be a good alternative to other neutral Italian white varieties or indeed other high acid 
varieties such as  Chenin Blanc, Grüner Veltliner or Albariño. It will most likely be sold in premium 
supermarkets rather than discounters, as well as Canadian and Scandinavian Monopolies and 
more premium On Trade and Multiple Specialists..
Wine 6 
a)Pinot Grigio, Veneto 
The pale water-white colour and simple, one-dimensional citrus and green fruit immediately 
suggest Pinot Grigio. The light body, high,mcrisp acidity and 12.5% alcohol are all consistent with 
the high volume styles of this variety from delle Venezie as is the quite short ﬁnish. The lack of any 
real complexity from oak or lees ageing are all consistent with these simple styles from the 
Veneto.
b) A very simple, dry, easy-drinking, uncomplicated yet refreshing wine, one intended for 
immediate consumption
The wine is well balanced between the high acidity and the light body but it is still very simple and 
straightforward in style. It is quite one-dimensional, with very modest citrus fruit characters, no 
complexity from any winemaking techniques and quite a short ﬁnish. 
The simple style and dry, high acidity and subtle ﬂoral and citrus nature indicate an entry level 
wine selling for around $12. It will therefore appeal to a wide audience of wine drinkers looking for 
a crisp, dry white wine on a strict budget and at a keen price point. The very approachable, 
neutral nature of the wine indicate its will be widely available to the mass market consumer in 
multiple outlets such as supermarkets, convenience stores and On Trade chains. It lends itself 
perfectly to multiple forms of packaging from bottle and bag-in-box to cans and could also be 
suitable as a mixer with fruit based drinks.
Wine 7 
a)Greco, Greco di Tufo 
The pale golden colour and notes of greengage, quince and peach could suggest a number of 
varieties such as Fiano, Garganega or Greco. The alcohol 13% is consistent with all these though 
the acidity is high and too crisp for most Fiano. The wine has quite a phenolic edge, full body and 
a smoky undertone which is more in line with the volcanic nature of Greco over the more herbal, 
camomile notes often found with Garganega. This unique variety and smoky note suggests one 
location, Greco di Tufo in Campania.
b) A full bodied, complex, dry, volcanic and quite intense style. A wine that will keep in the 
medium term.
A very good quality Riserva level. The palate is very complex with notes of wild ﬂowers, 
greengage, creaminess and a smoky volcanic edge. There is a high level of stone fruit 
concentration and the wine is underpinned with surprisingly high and refreshing acidity which is 
well balanced with the 13% alcohol, all consistent with a very good quality wine. This together 
with the fairly long ﬁnish all indicates a level above generic and points to a Riserva quality.
The complex, full bodied and smoky nature suggests a wine selling for around $40. The ripe fruit 
characters with notes of peach and apricot together with the dry style means it will appeal to this 
that love fuller-bodied premium wines from Chardonnay to Viognier. The high crisp acidity, though, 
provides an unusual refreshing proﬁle for such a full bodied wine. The very unfamiliar grape variety 
and location means it will be sold predominantly in its own region of Campania but will ﬁnd export 
markets particularly in USA and UK in Independent Specialist and higher end, likely Italian 
restaurants where the style can be recommended.
QUESTION 3 
Wine 8 
a)The very pale colour and gentle notes of orange blossom, green apple and grapefruit suggest 
a wine from a cool climate to give this subtly aromatic style. The modest alcohol 11.5%, oﬀ-
dry style, high crisp acidity and light body are consistent with this cooler climate and 
contribute to produce this very approachable and ﬂoral wine. The emphasis on primary fruit 
ﬂavours with no trace of vanilla and toast suggest the wine was fermented in stainless steel 
rather than oak to preserve the primary aromatics of the grape varieties, likely at cool 
temperatures 15-16C. The very integrated nature points to a likely co-fermentation of the 
varieties to produce the very light, harmonious style and the 4g/l RS indicates fermentation 
stopped just before the end, possibly naturally. The light body, lack of any oxidative notes and 
water-white colour indicate a wine that has undergone a very short period of ageing in 
stainless steel, 3-4 months, to create this very approachable, straightforward, early drinking 
style.
b) A good quality wine that shows a modest amount of concentration. It does though show some 
complexity from the array of primary fruit ﬂavours from ﬂoral to citrus and green olive. It is very 
well balanced between the high acidity, oﬀ-dry style and modest alcohol and the ﬁnish is medium.
This is a wine that could be marketed as a much more aromatic alternative to less expressive 
crisp, slightly drier white wines such as Muscadet sur Lie or Pinot Grigio. The quite high degree of 
aromatics for such a straightforward wine means it could cross the divide between the Pinot 
Grigio, Sauvignon Blanc or Albariño drinker, probably for an equally attractive price point of 
around £9. The modest alcohol 11.5% means it is also on trend for those looking for lower alcohol 
wines and it could therefore be marketed as an adventurous choice for the less risk-averse 
consumer.
Wine 9 - CORKED  (Tried to ignore the TCA and write an objective note) 
a) The very ripe fruit ﬂavours from candied lemon, to white peach, mango and walnut suggest a 
relatively warm and dry climate to produce this more intense and rounded style. The alcohol 
13.5% would seem to suggest a sheltered, steep, southerly facing location to achieve this full 
bodied, ripe style with the moderately crisp acidity coming from diurnal shift and cooler night-time 
temperatures. The distinct saline and chalky ﬁnish suggests a granitic and likely limestone soil 
allowing the powerful terroir, wet stone notes to shine through.
The very pure citrus and stone fruit characters with no phenolic edge suggest a whole bunch 
pressing and the pronounced vanilla and toast point to likely fermentation in French oak barriques 
to give this more harmonious oaked style. The integrated buttery notes indicates that full 
malolactic took place in barrel and the very creamy texture points to ageing on lees for around 12 
months. The ﬁne toast on the ﬁnish conﬁrms ageing in the same French oak barriques, likely 30% 
new, to give this very complex, ﬁne toast and nutty style.
b) Outstanding quality, special cuvée $150 
The very pure  ﬂoral peach ﬂavours and complex nature from barrel fermentation and ageing 
suggest an outstanding quality wine, likely around $150 retail. The wine shows great intensity and 
precision and a very high degree of complexity from the barrel fermentation, ageing, malolactic 
and powerful terroir notes. The ﬁnish too is long all consistent with the outstanding quality. 
The wide range of aromas and ﬂavours mean it could be marketed as an alternative to other 
prestigious white wine blends such as GCC White Bordeaux or top quality white Châteauneuf-du-
Pape. Likely from a well known origin for red wines this less familiar white style is a wine that 
could be positioned as a line extension to these more popular red styles. However, it will probably 
be made in more limited quantities and therefore possibly be sold at a slightly higher price. 
Despite the lack of familiarity  it could be more highly prized due to its rarity. The high degree of 
complexity and long ageing potential means it would also be suitable for collectors but could also 
be a great Fine Wine by the glass option in prestigious On Trade establishments, particularly 
under Coravin. 
QUESTION 4 
Wine 10 
a)Marlborough, New Zealand. Sauvignon Blanc 
The pronounced nose of freshly cut grass, lemon, and passion fruit together with high crisp 
acidity and dry style  immediately suggest Sauvignon Blanc as the variety. There is too much 
ripeness and tropical fruit for the Loire pointing more to New World. The very overt characters 
suggest South Africa or New Zealand as most likely but the very pungent nature is too strong 
even for South Africa and suggests New Zealand and Marlborough in particular. The 13.5% 
alcohol and very leesy texture are consistent with premium examples of this variety.
b) Very good quality, special cuvée
The wine shows the typical gooseberry and passion fruit notes of a Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc 
but has much more complexity than the generic examples. The wild, sauvage overtone and very 
savoury palate indicate likely fermentation with natural yeast and further complexity from the 
subtle oxidative notes from partial oak ageing. The fruit is pure and very concentrated and the 
ﬁnish too is quite long all further testament to the very good quality. It may stop short of the very 
top examples but shows how this popular style can evolve into a more serious and age worthy 
wine.
C) A complex, wild yeast fermented, oak aged and complex style.
This more complex, oak aged style means it will ﬁnd favour with more engaged and inquisitive 
consumers willing to spend $40 on a NZ Sauvignon Blanc. It will therefore be much more limited 
in appeal and likely sold mostly through Independent Wine Merchants and Premium On Trade. It 
can be marketed as a more serious wine to compete with premium Sancerre or Pouilly-Fumé and 
could be positioned as a wine that can age rather than for immediate drinking more typical of the 
generic Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc styles.
Wine 11 
a) Pfalz, Germany. Riesling 
The pale lemon colour and very expressive nose of elderﬂower, green apple, apricot and peach 
suggest Riesling or Chenin Blanc as the variety. The medium-dry style could be consistent with 
both yet the alcohol 9.5% is too low for Chenin Blanc and the high, tensile acidity too extreme for 
most Chenin Blancs leaving Riesling as most likely. The hint of petrol too is more in line with 
Riesling. The medium-dry nature with 50g/l RS, high acidity and 9.5% alcohol points to Germany 
as the origin. It has a combination of clean citrus characters and riper stone fruit notes suggesting 
a warmer origin than the cooler and lighter Mosel suggesting either Rheingau or Pfalz. The 
medium-dry style would generally be more common in Rheingau but the predominance of stone 
fruit notes would seem to suggest the slightly warmer Pfalz as most likely.
b) Good quality Kabinett, Gutswein
The wine is good quality with well deﬁned and quite intense citrus and stone fruit notes. There is 
excellent balance between the high, taut acidity and medium-dry style, 50g/l RS. There is subtle 
complexity from the range of primary fruit ﬂavours, from elderﬂower, citrus to peach, and the 
ﬁnish, too, is medium. There is elegance and poise which further conﬁrm a good quality Kabinett. 
It lacks the extra length, mineral, terroir intensity and depth of an Erste or  Grosse Lage site 
suggesting more likely a Gutswein from a very reputable Estate.
c) A light bodied, medium-dry, quite complex, very invigorating  Kabinett style.
The medium-dry nature and good quality indicate a wine selling for around $25. The highly 
integrated level of sweetness means it could still appeal to those drinkers who prefer drier rather 
than sweeter wines and for ones looking for exquisite balance to oﬀset the very high acidity. It is 
still likely to be more popular outside its native Germany where demand for the pure Trocken 
styles is strong, but it could ﬁnd outlets in export markets such as Asia where the medium-dry 
style and high crisp acidity can be a perfect foil for the spicy cuisine. The established market of 
the UK could also be a renewed target with the 9.5% alcohol now attracting lower duty rates and 
therefore a more competitive retail price point.
Wine 12 
a)Salta, Argentina. Torrontes                                                                                                                          
The very pronounced orange blossom, fresh grape and citronella aromas point straight to the 
highly aromatic Torrontes. The medium body, quite high, crisp acidity and alcohol 13.5% are 
all in line with this location. The very pure ﬂoral and grape characters and more phenolic edge 
point to the very high altitude and higher UV climate of Salta over the slightly less aromatic 
and less pungent wines of Mendoza.
b)A good quality wine, likely an Estate level example.
There is a some degree of complexity from the quite wide array of primary aromas : ﬂoral, grape 
and peach together with a slightly creamy texture from some lees ageing. The wine has a very 
good balance between the 13.5 % alcohol and quite high acidity and the ﬁnish is medium. It all 
points to a good quality wine. It lacks the extra concentration, complexity and length of an old 
vines or single vineyard  example, pointing more towards a good Estate level wine.
c) A very aromatic, moderately complex, high altitude, and very approachable style of Torrontés.
This very aromatic and subtly complex style suggests a retail price of around $16. It will therefore 
appeal to the budget conscious consumer looking for interesting and unusual dry white wines at 
an aﬀordable price point. It could be marketed at those consumers that love highly aromatic 
wines from Sauvignon Blanc to Riesling and Muscat. The unusual variety and very unfamiliar 
locality means it could well be more suitable to Multiple Specialists and On trade chains where 
recommendation is key. Some higher end supermarkets could also be potential outlets particularly 
if the wine has garnered favourable wine critic ratings which could be used via shelf barkers in-
store.The very refreshing, unoaked style lends itself perfectly to screw cap closure too.