MW Paper 3 - TORONTO April 12th  2026.     Notes by MATTHEW STUBBS MW 
QUESTION 1 
Wine 1 
a)Cap Classique, Constantia 
The pale lemon colour, ﬁne persistent mousse and notes of elderﬂower, lemon curd and brioche 
indicate a Traditional Method sparkling wine. The medium body, very dry style and high, crisp 
acidity point to a cool climate and suggest either Champagne, England or South Africa. However  
there is a pure core of some riper Meyer Lemon which moves away from Old World and points to 
New World as more likely. The acidity, though high, is not quite as elevated as the cooler climates 
of Champagne or England and points more to a Cap Classique style from Western Cape in South 
Africa. The 12.5% alcohol and very dry ﬁnish, 2g/l dosage, are consistent with this.
b) 
A pale coloured, quite complex, very refreshing, very dry, Blanc de Blancs style of sparkling wine.
The wine is a very good quality Vintage style which shows a very direct and pure core of citrus 
fruit. It shows excellent balance between the very high acidity, medium body, creamy mousse and 
quite pure lemon fruit concentration. It has underlying complexity from subtle brioche notes from 
around 30 months on lees and the ﬁnish is quite long. It stops short of the broader, richer and 
more autolytic Prestige styles, suggesting a very good quality Vintage.
c) The quite complex, autolytic nature with 30 months on lees  and overall very good quality 
suggest a price of around $55. The pure core of citrus fruit and yeasty complexity suggest it 
would compete globally with other Traditional Method sparkling wines, particularly cooler climate 
styles rather than other New World examples, such as England and Champagne but at a more 
competitive price point than these two. The Blanc de Blancs style mean it will be more niche 
internationally than a straight NV blend but it could ﬁnd export opportunities in markets that like 
the Extra Brut, more austere styles such as UK, Netherlands and Scandinavia. It still may require 
hand selling in these markets as Cap Classique, though very popular in domestic market, may 
need to be recommended outside its local origin. 
Wine 2 
  
a)England 
The pale golden colour, elegant mousse and combination of rose petal, strawberry, green apple 
and elderﬂower together with the broad quite rich yeasty palate point to a Traditional Method wine 
from Pinot Noir, Chardonnay and Meunier. The 12% alcohol, full, rounded style with emphasis 
more on yeast than fruit suggest an Old World over new World origin and point to Champagne or 
England in particular. The quite concentrated palate and fairly rich autolytic proﬁle are consistent 
with both but the more green apple fruit and extremely high and very racy acidity point to the even 
cooler climate of England over Champagne.
b) A full bodied, broadly autolytic, extremely racy, super refreshing and complex NV Style.
The wine is very good quality with a richness and breadth on the palate, and a high level of 
autolytic complexity. The full rounded mouthfeel and concentrated yeast and brioche notes point 
to at least 3 years on lees to give this complex style. The balance, too, between the very high 
crisp acidity, delicate mousse, full body and quite high fruit intensity is excellent and the ﬁnish is 
quite long. It just stops short of the even richer and more autolytic Vintage styles pointing to a 
very good NV.
c) The rich, broad autolytic style with very high acidity and quite a long ﬁnish suggest this is a 
wine that will compete head on with Champagne.Closest in style than other Traditional Method 
sparkling wines to NV Champagne and at a similar price point, $100, it may struggle to gain a 
foothold in many export markets. The wine may therefore be in more limited distribution on the 
global stage compared to its local market where loyalty to these styles is strong. However ,with 
Champagne prices edging up, this style stands more chance to increase its presence abroad. It 
already has a strong foothold in the Nordic countries, particularly Norway where these very crisp, 
dry styles are popular. Volume will always be much smaller than Champagne so it will never 
compete in multiple export markets. However, the increasing reputation and overall high 
consistent quality will allow further international gains to be made especially in the USA, Canada 
and other Commonwealth countries.
Wine 3 
a) Champagne, France 
The pale golden colour, very ﬁne and delicate mousse, with very intense rich marmite yeasty 
character and very long length immediately point to Champagne. The high, taut acidity, 12.5% 
alcohol, extremely autolytic mouthfeel, very dry style and very high quality are all consistent with 
Champagne.
b)  A highly complex, very dry, extremely autolytic, mature, Vintage style. One that has still 
potential to hold despite its maturity.
The very broad mouthfeel and high level of fruit and yeast concentration point to an outstanding 
quality wine. The mousse is extremely ﬁne, delicate yet persistent and is extremely well balanced 
with the high acidity, very dry proﬁle and full body. The very high degree of complexity coming 
from the very intense marmite characters from around 15 years on lees give this wine a depth and 
length to oﬀset the very crisp acidity. The ﬁnish, too, is very long and it clearly has potential to age 
further and points to an excellent quality, Vintage Cuvée.
c) The extremely complex, yeasty and autolytic character with the very ﬁne persistent mousse and 
long ﬁnish point to a Vintage style and one likely retailing for around $150. This very intense 
yeasty style from over a decade on lees together with the very high quality, Extra Brut proﬁle and 
high price point means it will appeal to a very narrow band of consumers who understand and 
recognise the style. This late disgorged style is very niche and would only be suited primarily to 
markets that love these very ‘marmite; styles, the UK in particular. It would also give it a point of 
diﬀerence in a global context to other Champagne Houses who rarely produce this style. The 
exceptional quality means it will no doubt garner high praise from wine critics and international 
competitions which would allow opportunities for sales in broader international markets.
QUESTION 2 
Wine 4 
a)  
The pale golden colour and pronounced notes of lemon, peach, butter and hazelnut suggest a 
wine made from Chardonnay. The very pristine fruit with no noticeable phenolics point to whole 
bunch pressing and the very ﬁne integrated toast and boot polish character with a savoury 
overtone suggest fermentation in new French oak barrels, likely with natural yeast. The high yet 
rounded acidity indicates malolactic was undertaken. The quite pronounced bread dough and 
pastry notes together with the very high-toned vanilla point to ageing on lees in the same new 
French oak barrels (500 litres) for at least 12 months to give this very steely, ﬂinty style. The highly 
reductive character indicate the wine was topped up during this time and likely without 
batonnage, The 12 months ageing in barrel suggests natural sedimentation and this together with 
the very high quality indicates likely bottling with no ﬁning or ﬁltration.
b) An excellent quality, single vineyard.
The wine shows an intense core of very precise, citrus fruit. It is highly complex with very 
integrated ﬁne toast notes from barrel fermentation and ageing in new French oak. This is further 
enhanced by the very creamy and reductive style from extensive time on lees, 12 months. The 
wine too is extremely saline and mineral, allowing the terroir notes to shine through, all in line with 
an excellent quality, single Vineyard wine. The ﬁnish too is long, all conﬁrming the excellent 
quality. 
The wine is still very primary in nature with mostly lemon, apple and peach notes and the pale 
golden colour suggests a youthful wine of 2-3 years old.The high degree of concentration will 
allow the wine to improve over the next 5-6 years developing more complex dried fruit and nutty 
characters. The reductive style together with the high, crisp acidity will allow it to then hold a 
further 7-10 years before decline. 
c) Côtes du Jura 
The highly complex barrel fermented and oak aged style could immediately suggest Côte d’Or 
Burgundy. However, the extremely high acidity, modest 12.5% alcohol and very reductive saline 
and chalky style are more in line with very high quality Chardonnay from the cooler climate of 
Côtes du Jura.
Wine 5 
a) The medium-sweet style and light, frizzante mousse point to an Ancestrale sparkling style. The 
quite crisp acidity and grapey and orange blossom nature point to a wine likely based on Muscat. 
The quite pure pristine citrus characters indicate the fermentation was likely started in stainless 
steel tank to preserve the primary fruited characters. The low 8.5% alcohol, medium sweet style, 
40g/l RS, and frizzante rather than Spumante style points to a continuation of the initial 
fermentation in bottle on the same yeast. The lack of any yeasty characters point to a fresh Pet 
Nat rather than autolytic style and the absence of any sediment or cloudy appearance suggest the 
wine was disgorged prior to the ﬁnal sealing with crown cap to give this pristine, fresh, medium 
sweet, Pet-Nat style.
b) An acceptable quality Pet Nat, retailing for around $13.
The wine is quite aromatic with fresh grape and orange blossom aromas and some Muscat 
varietal typicity. The mandarine fruit is very well balanced with the medium yet quite crisp acidity , 
medium sweet style and 8.5% alcohol. The frizzante petillance is well integrated with the citrus 
fruit too and balanced with the quite crisp acidity. The wine, though, is quite simple in style with 
no real complexity with only a very slight textural note from the yeast suggesting more an 
acceptable than good quality wine. The ﬁnish, too  is quite short. This is a very ‘clean’ pristine, 
disgorged style of Pet Nat without the complex yeasty characters of a more minimal intervention 
style, all conﬁrming the acceptable quality..
The very primary notes indicate a wine that is very youthful, only 1-2 years old. The light fruit 
concentration and immediate citrus approachability indicate this is a wine to be drunk young, and 
will not improve. However the quite high acidity and very clean and not too funky nature point to a 
wine that will probably keep for a further 6 months in bottle before decline.
c) Pet Nat, Vin de France 
The pale lemon colour and very ﬂoral and grapey characters suggest a wine based on Muscat 
and therefore France as most likely. The Ancestrale Nature, very clean Pet Nat style, 40g/l RS, 
8.5% alcohol and high crisp acidity would seem to suggest Languedoc but the style precludes 
any AOC designation so it is likely a generic Vin de France.
Wine 6 
a)
The pale golden colour, bone dry style, 15% alcohol and very pronounced sourdough and yeasty 
nose points straight to a Fino style and a wine therefore based on Palomino. The lack of any 
varietal aromatics point to a warm fermentation at around 20-22ºC and the lack of any residual 
sugar and 15% alcohol point to fortiﬁcation with neutral grape spirit, 96%, at the end of 
fermentation. The very pronounced yeasty and sourdough characters with a very saline ﬁnish 
point to ageing for a very extended time under ﬂor for at least 8 years. The combination of fresh 
and dried citrus fruit characters point to this long ageing in solera and the richer body and more 
textured, yeasty mouthfeel indicate an En Rama style and therefore bottling without ﬁltration.
b) A very good quality, En Rama style.
The very pronounced yeasty characters with notes of bread dough, umami, almond and pastry 
point to very long ﬂor ageing, 8 years similar to a Pasada style. The wine is very complex with the 
combination of citrus ﬂavours and the very saline ﬂor notes and the ﬁnish too is fairly long. It is 
clearly a step up from a generic Fino style and all conﬁrms the very good quality. 
The wine is already at its peak with well integrated ﬂor, yeasty and citrus ﬂavours. It is extremely 
well balanced between the modest acidity, 15% alcohol and quite full body and clearly but will not 
improve from here. It will though keep for at least another 1-2 years due to the high level of ﬂor 
and acetaldehyde but beyond that may lose some citrus freshness.

c) Sanlucar da Barrameda 
The bone dry style, 15% alcohol, modest acidity and very yeasty character point to a complex 
Fino Style. The very yeasty characters and more pronounced sourdough notes point to a very 
long ageing under ﬂor in a more humid environment  and suggest Manzanilla over Fino. The very 
saline ﬁnish is also consistent with this and therefore Sanlucar de Barrameda as the origin.
QUESTION 3 
Wine 7 
a)Rivesaltes VDN , Grenache 
The quite deep tawny intensity and sweet style could immediately suggest Port and the Douro as 
origin. However the wine is focussed entirely on dried raspberry and dried cherry notes with no 
hint of black fruits indicating a wine based entirely on Grenache unlike the blended red and black 
fruit ﬂavours of ruby Port. The alcohol too is 17% in line with the lower fortiﬁed VDN styles as is 
the medium acidity and the wine is slightly less sweet at 70g/l all again in line with VDN.
The tawny colour and more dried fruit than primary characters point to an oxidative rather than 
reductive style and suggest Rivesaltes over Maury or Banyuls as the most likely origin as these 
are the most predominant styles in this Appellation.
b) The notes of dried red fruits, with raspberry cherry and a touch of pepper spice point to 
Grenache as the variety. The 17% alcohol and 70g/l RS suggest fortiﬁcation with neutral grape  
spirit, 96%, after around 4 days of fermentation. The tawny colour and quite pronounced dried 
fruit characters point to ageing in old oak barrels, 600 litres for around 6 years with no topping up 
to give this oxidative style.
c) A good quality, Tuilé style.
The wine shows a reasonable degree of dried fruit concentration and has complexity from the 
oxidative dried fruit and coﬀee ﬂavours, It is well balanced between the medium sweet style, 17% 
alcohol and moderate concentration and the ﬁnish too is medium. It lacks the extra level of 
oxidative intensity of the better Hors d’Age styles suggesting a good quality generic VDN.
The quite deep tawny colour and oxidative nature points to a mature wine of around 10 years old. 
The wine is already fully developed and will not improve but it does have enough concentration to 
keep a further 4-5 years before decline all backed up with the medium, fresh acidity.
Wine 8 
a)Douro, T. Nacional, T.Francesa, T.Roriz, T Barroca 
The deep, ruby colour, 20% alcohol, 105g/l RS and pronounced nose of plum, dark cherry and 
clove point straight to Port and therefore Douro as the origin. The medium yet refreshing acidity, 
full body and sweet and reductive stye are consistent with Ruby style of Port and conﬁrm Douro 
as the origin. The combination of red and black fruit ﬂavours point to a blend of T.Nacional, 
T.Francesa and T.Roriz the latter providing the moderate tannic backbone, all further in line with 
Port and Douro as the origin.
b) The combination of red and black fruit ﬂavour points to a blend of Touriga Nacional, Touriga 
Francesa and Tinta Roriz. The deep ruby colour, medium, smooth tannins, 20% spirity alcohol 
and 105g/l RS point to rapid extraction, possibly by mechanical plungers, before fortiﬁcation after 
48 hours with aguardente, 77% grape spirit. The medium yet smooth tannins and quite intense, 
rounded nature suggest ageing for around 5 years in a reductive environment, large wooden vats. 
The clean pristine appearance with no trace of sediment suggests ﬁltration before bottling.
c) A very good quality LBV.
The wine is very well balanced between the medium, smooth tannins, 20% abv and 105g/l RS. 
There is quite an intense depth of red and black fruit concentration and some complexity from the 
cinnamon and clove notes. The ﬁnish too is quite long all in line with the very good quality.
The extremely harmonious balance of bramble fruits, medium acidity and medium, integrated 
tannins point to a wine that is at its peak and one of around 5-6 years old. The fruit, though quite 
intense and concentrated, will not develop positively from here. It does, though, have the medium 
acidity and the moderate tannins to keep for another 2-3 years before losing freshness.

Wine 9. 
a)Recioto della Valpolicella,. Corvina/Corvinone/Rondinella 
The quite deep ruby colour, 13% alcohol, 120g/l RS, kirsch and dried cherry character point to a 
red passito style and a Recioto from Valpolicella. The very pronounced plum and cherry notes are 
consistent with a majority of Corvina/ Corvinone in the blend and the ﬂoral and peppery overtones 
indicate a complement of one-third Rondinella. The very fresh acidity to underpin the high 120g/l 
sugar and 13% alcohol are constant with the Recioto styles from Valpolicella as is the very good 
quality and touch of VA.
b) The high degree of sugar 120g/l together with pronounced kirsch characters and 13% alcohol 
point to extended drying of the grapes, likely up to 4 months to give this very sweet and complex 
style. The very primary fruit characters point to fermentation in old oak vats or inert vessels with 
fermentation being arrested before the end, probably naturally due to the high sugar and relatively 
high alcohol. The very primary nature but with a rounded mouthfeel and quite rich toasty 
overtones suggests ageing in old oak casks for around 24 months before bottling.
c) Very good quality, single vineyard.
The wine has a  pure core of concentrated cherry fruit achieved from the extended drying. It is 
extremely well balanced between the high sugar, 13% alcohol and high, racy acidity . The ﬁnish 
too is quite long and complex with only a touch of VA, all testament to the very good quality, likely 
single vineyard.
The ruby colour, mostly primary bramble and cherry notes with a touch of kirsch colour point to a 
relatively young wine of around 6-7 years old. There is enough intensity for it to improve over the 
next 3-4 years when it will develop more dried cherry and more intense kirsch complexity. It 
should then hold for a further 4-5 years all supported by the high sugar, 13% alcohol and high , 
crisp acidity.
Wine 10 
a)Niagara Peninsula, Riesling 
The pale lemon colour and pronounced nose of green apple, lemon balm and peach with very 
high, racy acidity point straight to Riesling. The very pure core of citrus and stone fruit with a 
touch of tropical melon are consistent with Riesling and point more to New World, Australia or 
Canada over Germany. The medium sweet style with 90g/l and 12% alcohol and very high crisp 
acidity are more consistent with cooler climate Canada than the rarer but sweeter style examples 
from more temperate Australia. This together with the lack of any mushroom or viscous notes 
from botrytis are consistent too the the warmer and lake-inﬂuenced climate of Niagara Peninsula 
and point to a Late Harvest rather than noble rot style from this location.
b) The very pure citrus fruit character, medium sweet style with no hint of honey, or fungal botrytis 
suggest the sweetness was achieved by late harvested grapes rather than noble rot. The quite 
high level of sugar, 90g/l point to at least a further 2 weeks drying on the vine post normal 
ripeness.The very primary fruit characters point to fermentation in stainless steel rather than oak 
and the 12% alcohol and 90g/l indicate the fermentation stopped before the end, probably by 
chilling and addition of SO2 rather than naturally. The preservation of the bold primary characters 
indicate ageing also in inert vessel for another 6 months before ﬁnal bottling.
c) A very good quality, super clinical and very precise Late Harvest wine. 
The combination of quite high sugar 90g/l and 12% alcohol indicate a high level of ripeness in the 
late harvested grapes. This quite high sugar is perfectly balanced by the very high acidity and 
provides a very direct and focussed style in combination with the well-deﬁned fruit. Complexity 
comes from a wide array of primary ﬂavours, apple blossom, lemon and peach with a tropical 
overtone.The ﬁnish too is quite long all consistent with a very good Late Harvest style.
A  youthful style as seen by the pale lemon colour and primary citrus and stone fruit characters 
indicating a wine of 2-3 years old. The wine has enough weight to improve over the next 1-2 years 
when it would start to develop some dried citrus and petrol notes. The 90g/l RS, very high acidity 
and quite intense, pure concentration will allow it to keep for at least another 3 years before 
decline.

Wine 11 
a)Madeira, Malvasia
The pale amber colour, 19% alcohol and pronounced nose of dried citrus peel, desiccated 
almond and caramel point straight to Madeira. The high sugar 105g/l RS point to a sweeter style 
of Fortiﬁed Wine consistent with Madeira and Malm sey therefore as the variety. The very high, 
lively acidity and oxidative, caramel overtones from “heating” during ageing all further conﬁrm 
Malmsey Madeira.
b) The pale amber colour, 105g/l RS and notes of dried citrus peel, coﬀee, salted almond and 
honey point to the sweetest styles of Madeira and indicate Malvasia as the grape variety. The 
105g/l RS and 19% alcohol point to arrested fermentation by fortiﬁcation with 96% neutral spirit, 
early on in fermentation, after around 2 days. The quite oxidative note and harmonious caramel 
overtones indicate ageing in the gentler Canteiro method rather than the more baked Estufagem. 
The medium ﬁnish points to ageing in oak casks for around 5 years before bottling.
c) A good quality, 5 year old Malvasia.
The wine shows excellent integration between the high acidity, 105g/l RS and 19% alcohol. 
Complexity is achieved through the gentle caramelisation from the Canteiro ageing and the 
integrated and quite oxidative ﬂavours from 5 years in cask. The ﬁnish too is medium pointing to a 
5 year old style.
The pale golden colour and oxidative, caramel nature indicate this wine is already fully developed. 
It will not improve but the combination of 105g/l RS, 19% abv and canteiro/oxidative ageing, 
together with the high crisp acidity indicate it will hold for at least 10 years.
Wine 12 
a) Jerez, Palomino, Pedro Ximenez 
The quite deep mahogany colour, 20% alcohol, medium, fresh acidity and very oxidative, sweet 
style with 134g/l RS point straight to Cream Sherry and therefore Jerez as the origin. The dried 
citrus characters with overt raisined and sultana notes point to a blend of Palomino and Pedro 
Ximenez. The very oxidative nature and mature style indicate long ageing in solera all consistent 
with Sherry and Jerez.
b) The deep mahogany colour, 20% alcohol and absence of any yeasty characters indicates 
fortiﬁcation at the end of fermentation to a high strength with neutral spirit, 96%, to prevent the 
development of ﬂor. This quite deep brown colour and pronounced oxidative characters indicate 
ageing in solera for at least 12 years. The very sweet style 134 g/l RS point to blending with at 
least 20% PX after the 12 years. The harmonious style points to further ageing in a ﬁnal solera 
after blending for at least 3 years to enable this high degree of integration.
c) Very good quality, Cream Sherry. 
The high and and quite luscious sugar, 134g/l is counterbalanced by a quite high degree of dried 
fruit, raisined concentration and medium yet quite refreshing acidity. There is quite a high degree 
of complexity, too,  from the dried fruits, caramel, coﬀee and raisined notes and the ﬁnish is quite 
long. It stops short of the very best VOS or VORS style  but is still a very good wine nonetheless.
The deep mahogany colour, dried ﬁg and caramel notes with no primary characters point to a fully 
developed wine, probably already one around 15 years old. It has reached its peak and will not 
improve but has the quite intense weight, luscious sweetness, and high alcohol to keep for 
decades, all supported by the medium yet freshening acidity.
